

The girl answered,

"I do not know where your house is."

Then he said,

"My house is a long way in the wood."

She began to make excuses, and said she could not find the way to it;
but the bridegroom said,

"You must come and pay me a visit next Sunday; I have already invited
company, and I will strew ashes on the path through the wood, so that
you will be sure to find it."

When Sunday came, and the girl set out on her way, she felt very uneasy
without knowing exactly why; and she filled both pockets full of peas
and lentils. There were ashes strewed on the path through the wood,
but, nevertheless, at each step she cast to the right and left a few
peas on the ground. So she went on the whole day until she came to the
middle of the wood, where it was the darkest, and there stood a lonely
house, not pleasant in her eyes, for it was dismal and unhomelike. She
walked in, but there was no one there, and the greatest stillness
reigned. Suddenly she heard a voice cry,

    "Turn back, turn back, thou pretty bride,
    Within this house thou must not bide,
    For here do evil things betide."

The girl glanced round, and perceived that the voice came from a bird
who was hanging in a cage by the wall. And again it cried,

    "Turn back, turn back, thou pretty bride,
    Within this house thou must not bide,
    For here do evil things betide."

Then the pretty bride went on from one room into another through the
whole house, but it was quite empty, and no soul to be found in it.

At last she reached the cellar, and there sat a very old woman nodding
her head.

"Can you tell me," said the bride, "if my bridegroom lives here?"

"Oh, poor child," answered the old woman, "do you know what has happened
to you? You are in a place of cut-throats. You thought you were a bride,
and soon to be married, but death will be your spouse. Look here, I have
a great kettle of water to set on, and when once they have you in their
power they will cut you in pieces without mercy, cook you, and eat you,
for they are cannibals. Unless I have pity on you, and save you, all is
over with you!"

Then the old woman hid her behind a great cask, where she could not be
seen.

"Be as still as a mouse," said she; "do not move or go away, or else you
are lost. At night, when the robbers are asleep, we will escape. I have
been waiting a long time for an opportunity."

No sooner was it settled than the wicked gang entered the house. They
brought another young woman with them, dragging her along, and they
were drunk, and would not listen to her cries and groans. They gave her
wine to drink, three glasses full, one of white wine, one of red, and
one of yellow, and then they cut her in pieces. The poor bride all the
while shaking and trembling when she saw what a fate the robbers had
intended for her. One of them noticed on the little finger of their
victim a golden ring, and as he could not draw it off easily, he took an
axe and chopped it off, but the finger jumped away, and fell behind the
cask on the bride's lap. The robber took up a light to look for it, but
he could not find it. Then said one of the others,

"Have you looked behind the great cask?"

But the old woman cried,

"Come to supper, and leave off looking till to-morrow; the finger cannot
run away."

Then the robbers said the old woman was right, and they left off
searching, and sat down to eat, and the old woman dropped some sleeping
stuff into their wine, so that before long they stretched themselves on
the cellar floor, sleeping and snoring. When the bride heard that, she
came from behind the cask, and had to make her way among the sleepers
lying all about on the ground, and she felt very much afraid lest she
might awaken any of them. But by good luck she passed through, and the
old woman with her, and they opened the door, and they made all haste to
leave that house of murderers. The wind had carried away the ashes from
the path, but the peas and lentils had budded and sprung up, and the
moonshine upon them showed the way. And they went on through the night,
till in the morning they reached the mill. Then the girl related to her
father all that had happened to her.

When the wedding-day came, the friends and neighbours assembled, the
miller having invited them, and the bridegroom also appeared. When they
were all seated at table, each one had to tell a story. But the bride
sat still, and said nothing, till at last the bridegroom said to her,

"Now, sweetheart, do you know no story? Tell us something."

She answered,

"I will tell you my dream. I was going alone through a wood, and I came
at last to a house in which there was no living soul, but by the wall
was a bird in a cage, who cried,

    'Turn back, turn back, thou pretty bride,
    Within this house thou must not bide,
    For evil things do here betide.'

"And then again it said it. Sweetheart, the dream is not ended. Then I
went through all the rooms, and they were all empty, and it was so
lonely and wretched. At last I went down into the cellar, and there sat
an old old woman, nodding her head. I asked her if my bridegroom lived
in that house, and she answered, 'Ah, poor child, you have come into a
place of cut-throats; your bridegroom does live here, but he will kill
you and cut you in pieces, and then cook and eat you.' Sweetheart, the
dream is not ended. But the old woman hid me behind a great cask, and no
sooner had she done so than the robbers came home, dragging with them a
young woman, and they gave her to drink wine thrice, white, red, and
yellow. Sweetheart, the dream is not yet ended. And then they killed
her, and cut her in pieces. Sweetheart, my dream is not yet ended. And
one of the robbers saw a gold ring on the finger of the young woman, and
as it was difficult to get off, he took an axe and chopped off the
finger, which jumped upwards, and then fell behind the great cask on my
lap. And here is the finger with the ring!"

At these words she drew it forth, and showed it to the company.

The robber, who during the story had grown deadly white, sprang up, and
would have escaped, but the folks held him fast, and delivered him up to
justice. And he and his whole gang were, for their evil deeds, condemned
and executed.




MR KORBES


A COCK and a hen once wanted to go a journey together. So the cock built
a beautiful carriage with four red wheels, and he harnessed four little
mice to it. And the cock and the hen got into it, and were driven off.
Very soon they met a cat, who asked where they were going. The cock
answered,

    "On Mr. Korbes a call to pay,
    And that is where we go to-day!"

"Take me with you," said the cat.

The cock answered,

"Very well, only you must sit well back, and then you will not fall
forward."

    "And pray take care
    Of my red wheels there;
    And wheels be steady,
    And mice be ready
    On Mr. Korbes a call to pay,
    For that is where we go to-day!"

Then there came up a millstone, then an egg, then a duck, then a pin,
and lastly a needle, who all got up on the carriage, and were driven
along. But when they came to Mr. Korbes's house he was not at home. So
the mice drew the carriage into the barn, the cock and the hen flew up
and perched on a beam, the cat sat by the fireside, the duck settled on
the water; but the egg wrapped itself in the towel, the pin stuck itself
in the chair cushion, the needle jumped into the bed among the pillows,
and the millstone laid itself by the door. Then Mr. Korbes came home,
and went to the hearth to make a fire, but the cat threw ashes in his
eyes. Then he ran quickly into the kitchen to wash himself, but the duck
splashed water in his face. Then he was going to wipe it with the towel,
but the egg broke in it, and stuck his eyelids together. In order to get
a little peace he sat down in his chair, but the pin ran into him, and,
starting up, in his vexation he threw himself on the bed, but as his
head fell on the pillow, in went the needle, so that he called out with
the pain, and madly rushed out. But when he reached the housedoor the
mill-stone jumped up and struck him dead.

What a bad man Mr. Korbes must have been!




TOM THUMB'S TRAVELS


THERE was once a tailor who had a son no higher than a thumb, so he was
called Tom Thumb. Notwithstanding his small size, he had plenty of
spirit, and one day he said to his father,

"Father, go out into the world I must and will."

"Very well, my son," said the old man, and taking a long darning needle,
he put a knob of sealing-wax on the end, saying,

"Here is a sword to take with you on your journey."

Now the little tailor wanted to have one more meal first, and so he
trotted into the kitchen to see what sort of a farewell feast his mother
had cooked for him. It was all ready, and the dish was standing on the
hearth. Then said he,

"Mother, what is the fare to-day?"

"You can see for yourself," said the mother. Then Tom Thumb ran to the
hearth and peeped into the dish, but as he stretched his neck too far
over it, the steam caught him and carried him up the chimney. For a time
he floated with the steam about in the air, but at last he sank down to
the ground. Then the little tailor found himself out in the wide world,
and he wandered about, and finally engaged himself to a master tailor,
but the food was not good enough for him.

"Mistress," said Tom Thumb, "if you do not give us better victuals, I
shall go out early in the morning and write with a piece of chalk on the
house-door, 'Plenty of potatoes to eat, and but little meat; so
good-bye, Mr. Potato.'"

"What are you after, grasshopper?" said the mistress, and growing angry
she seized a piece of rag to beat him off; but he crept underneath her
thimble, and then peeped at her, and put his tongue out at her. She took
up the thimble, and would have seized him, but he hopped among the rags,
and as the mistress turned them over to find him, he stepped into a
crack in the table. "He-hee! Mistress!" cried he, sticking out his head,
and when she was just going to grasp him, he jumped into the
table-drawer. But in the end she caught him, and drove him out of the
house.

So he wandered on until he came to a great wood; and there he met a gang
of robbers that were going to rob the king's treasury. When they saw the
little tailor, they thought to themselves,

"Such a little fellow might easily creep through a key-hole, and serve
instead of a pick-lock."

"Holloa!" cried one, "you giant Goliath, will you come with us to the
treasure-chamber? you can slip in, and then throw us out the money."

Tom Thumb considered a little, but at last he consented and went with
them to the treasure-chamber. Then he looked all over the doors above
and below, but there was no crack to be seen; at last he found one broad
enough to let him pass, and he was getting through, when one of the
sentinels that stood before the door saw him, and said to the other,

"See what an ugly spider is crawling there! I will put an end to him."

"Let the poor creature alone," said the other, "it has done you no
harm."

So Tom Thumb got safely through the crack into the treasure-chamber, and
he opened the window beneath which the thieves were standing, and he
threw them out one dollar after another. Just as he had well settled to
the work, he heard the king coming to take a look at his treasure, and
so Tom Thumb had to creep away. The king presently remarked that many
good dollars were wanting, but could not imagine how they could have
been stolen, as the locks and bolts were in good order, and everything
seemed secure. And he went away, saying to the two sentinels,

"Keep good guard; there is some one after the money."

When Tom Thumb had set to work anew, they heard the chink, chink of the
money, and hastily rushed in to catch the thief. But the little tailor,
as he heard them coming, was too quick for them, and, hiding in a
corner, he covered himself up with a dollar, so that nothing of him was
to be seen, and then he mocked the sentinels, crying, "Here I am!" They
ran about, and when they came near him, he was soon in another corner
under a dollar, crying, "Here I am!" Then the sentinels ran towards him,
and in a moment he was in a third corner, crying, "Here I am!" In this
way he made fools of them, and dodged them so long about the
treasure-chamber, that they got tired and went away. Then he set to
work, and threw the dollars out of the window, one after the other, till
they were all gone; and when it came to the last, as he flung it with
all his might, he jumped nimbly on it, and flew with it out of the
window. The robbers gave him great praise, saying,

"You are a most valiant hero; will you be our captain?"

But Tom Thumb thanked them, and said he would like to see the world
first. Then they divided the spoil; but the little tailor's share was
only one farthing, which was all he was able to carry.

Then binding his sword to his side, he bid the robbers good day, and
started on his way. He applied to several master tailors, but they would
not have anything to do with him; and at last he hired himself as indoor
servant at an inn. The maid servants took a great dislike to him, for he
used to see everything they did without being seen by them, and he told
the master and mistress about what they took from the plates, and what
they carried away out of the cellar. And they said, "Wait a little, we
will pay you out," and took counsel together to play him some
mischievous trick. Once when one of the maids was mowing the grass in
the garden she saw Tom Thumb jumping about and creeping among the
cabbages, and she mowed him with the grass, tied all together in a
bundle, and threw it to the cows. Among the cows was a big black one,
who swallowed him down, without doing him any harm. But he did not like
his lodging, it was so dark, and there was no candle to be had. When the
cow was being milked, he cried out,

    "Strip, strap, strull,
    Will the pail soon be full?"

But he was not understood because of the noise of the milk. Presently
the landlord came into the stable and said,

"To-morrow this cow is to be slaughtered."

At that Tom Thumb felt very terrified; and with his shrillest voice he
cried,

"Let me out first; I am sitting inside here!"

The master heard him quite plainly, but could not tell where the voice
came from.

"Where are you?" asked he.

"Inside the black one," answered Tom Thumb, but the master, not
understanding the meaning of it all, went away.

The next morning the cow was slaughtered. Happily, in all the cutting
and slashing he escaped all harm, and he slipped among the sausage-meat.
When the butcher came near to set to work, he cried with all his might,

"Don't cut so deep, don't cut so deep, I am underneath!"

But for the sound of the butcher's knife his voice was not heard. Now,
poor Tom Thumb was in great straits, and he had to jump nimbly out of
the way of the knife, and finally he came through with a whole skin. But
he could not get quite away, and he had to let himself remain with the
lumps of fat to be put in a black pudding. His quarters were rather
narrow, and he had to be hung up in the chimney in the smoke, and to
remain there a very long while. At last, when winter came he was taken
down, for the black pudding was to be set before a guest. And when the
landlady cut the black pudding in slices, he had to take great care not
to lift up his head too much, or it might be shaved off at the neck. At
last he saw his opportunity, took courage, and jumped out.

But as things had gone so badly with him in that house, Tom Thumb did
not mean to stay there, but betook himself again to his wanderings. His
freedom, however, did not last long. In the open fields there came a fox
who snapped him up without thinking.

"Oh, Mr. Fox," cries Tom Thumb, "here I am sticking in your throat; let
me out again."

"Very well," answered the fox. "It is true you are no better than
nothing; promise me the hens in your father's yard, then I will let you
go."

"With all my heart," answered Tom Thumb, "you shall have them all, I
promise you."

Then the fox let him go, and he ran home. When the father saw his dear
little son again, he gave the fox willingly all the hens that he had.

"And look, besides, what a fine piece of money I've got for you!" said
Tom Thumb, and handed over the farthing which he had earned in his
wanderings.

But how, you ask, could they let the fox devour all the poor chicks?

Why, you silly child, you know that your father would rather have you
than the hens in his yard!




THE ALMOND TREE


A LONG time ago, perhaps as much as two thousand years, there was a rich
man, and he had a beautiful and pious wife, and they loved each other
very much, and they had no children, though they wished greatly for
some, and the wife prayed for one day and night. Now, in the courtyard
in front of their house stood an almond tree; and one day in winter the
wife was standing beneath it, and paring an apple, and as she pared it
she cut her finger, and the blood fell upon the snow.

"Ah," said the woman, sighing deeply, and looking down at the blood, "if
only I could have a child as red as blood, and as white as snow!"

[Illustration: THE ALMOND TREE

    "KYWITT, KYWITT, KYWITT, I CRY,
    OH WHAT A BEAUTIFUL BIRD AM I!"]

And as she said these words, her heart suddenly grew light, and she felt
sure she should have her wish. So she went back to the house, and when a
month had passed the snow was gone; in two months everything was green;
in three months the flowers sprang out of the earth; in four months the
trees were in full leaf, and the branches were thickly entwined; the
little birds began to sing, so that the woods echoed, and the blossoms
fell from the trees; when the fifth month had passed the wife stood
under the almond tree, and it smelt so sweet that her heart leaped
within her, and she fell on her knees for joy; and when the sixth month
had gone, the fruit was thick and fine, and she remained still; and the
seventh month she gathered the almonds, and ate them eagerly, and was
sick and sorrowful; and when the eighth month had passed she called
to her husband, and said, weeping,

"If I die, bury me under the almond tree."

Then she was comforted and happy until the ninth month had passed, and
then she bore a child as white as snow and as red as blood, and when she
saw it her joy was so great that she died.

Her husband buried her under the almond tree, and he wept sore; time
passed, and he became less sad; and after he had grieved a little more
he left off, and then he took another wife.

His second wife bore him a daughter, and his first wife's child was a
son, as red as blood and as white as snow. Whenever the wife looked at
her daughter she felt great love for her, but whenever she looked at the
little boy, evil thoughts came into her heart, of how she could get all
her husband's money for her daughter, and how the boy stood in the way;
and so she took great hatred to him, and drove him from one corner to
another, and gave him a buffet here and a cuff there, so that the poor
child was always in disgrace; when he came back after school hours there
was no peace for him.

Once, when the wife went into the room upstairs, her little daughter
followed her, and said,

"Mother, give me an apple."

"Yes, my child," said the mother, and gave her a fine apple out of the
chest, and the chest had a great heavy lid with a strong iron lock.

"Mother," said the little girl, "shall not my brother have one too?"

That was what the mother expected, and she said,

"Yes, when he comes back from school."

And when she saw from the window that he was coming, an evil thought
crossed her mind, and she snatched the apple, and took it from her
little daughter, saying,

"You shall not have it before your brother."

Then she threw the apple into the chest, and shut to the lid. Then the
little boy came in at the door, and she said to him in a kind tone, but
with evil looks,

"My son, will you have an apple?"

"Mother," said the boy, "how terrible you look! yes, give me an apple!"

Then she spoke as kindly as before, holding up the cover of the chest,

"Come here and take out one for yourself."

And as the boy was stooping over the open chest, crash went the lid
down, so that his head flew off among the red apples. But then the woman
felt great terror, and wondered how she could escape the blame. And she
went to the chest of drawers in her bedroom and took a white
handkerchief out of the nearest drawer, and fitting the head to the
neck, she bound them with the handkerchief, so that nothing should be
seen, and set him on a chair before the door with the apple in his hand.

Then came little Marjory into the kitchen to her mother, who was
standing before the fire stirring a pot of hot water.

"Mother," said Marjory, "my brother is sitting before the door and he
has an apple in his hand, and looks very pale; I asked him to give me
the apple, but he did not answer me; it seems very strange."

"Go again to him," said the mother, "and if he will not answer you, give
him a box on the ear."

So Marjory went again and said,

"Brother, give me the apple."

But as he took no notice, she gave him a box on the ear, and his head
fell off, at which she was greatly terrified, and began to cry and
scream, and ran to her mother, and said,

"O mother! I have knocked my brother's head off!" and cried and
screamed, and would not cease.

"O Marjory!" said her mother, "what have you done? but keep quiet, that
no one may see there is anything the matter; it can't be helped now; we
will put him out of the way safely."

When the father came home and sat down to table, he said,

"Where is my son?"

But the mother was filling a great dish full of black broth, and Marjory
was crying bitterly, for she could not refrain. Then the father said
again,

"Where is my son?"

"Oh," said the mother, "he is gone into the country to his great-uncle's
to stay for a little while."

"What should he go for?" said the father, "and without bidding me
good-bye, too!"

"Oh, he wanted to go so much, and he asked me to let him stay there six
weeks; he will be well taken care of."

"Dear me," said the father, "I am quite sad about it; it was not right
of him to go without bidding me good-bye."

With that he began to eat, saying,

"Marjory, what are you crying for? Your brother will come back some
time."

After a while he said,

"Well, wife, the food is very good; give me some more."

And the more he ate the more he wanted, until he had eaten it all up,
and he threw the bones under the table. Then Marjory went to her chest
of drawers, and took one of her best handkerchiefs from the bottom
drawer, and picked up all the bones from under the table and tied them
up in her handkerchief, and went out at the door crying bitterly. She
laid them in the green grass under the almond tree, and immediately her
heart grew light again, and she wept no more. Then the almond tree began
to wave to and fro, and the boughs drew together and then parted, just
like a clapping of hands for joy; then a cloud rose from the tree, and
in the midst of the cloud there burned a fire, and out of the fire a
beautiful bird arose, and, singing most sweetly, soared high into the
air; and when he had flown away, the almond tree remained as it was
before, but the handkerchief full of bones was gone. Marjory felt quite
glad and light-hearted, just as if her brother were still alive. So she
went back merrily into the house and had her dinner.

The bird, when it flew away, perched on the roof of a goldsmith's house,
and began to sing,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;
    It was my father who ate of me;
    It was my sister Marjory
    Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

The goldsmith was sitting in his shop making a golden chain, and when he
heard the bird, who was sitting on his roof and singing, he started up
to go and look, and as he passed over his threshold he lost one of his
slippers; and he went into the middle of the street with a slipper on
one foot and only a sock on the other; with his apron on, and the gold
chain in one hand and the pincers in the other; and so he stood in the
sunshine looking up at the bird.

"Bird," said he, "how beautifully you sing; do sing that piece over
again."

"No," said the bird, "I do not sing for nothing twice; if you will give
me that gold chain I will sing again."

"Very well," said the goldsmith, "here is the gold chain; now do as you
said."

Down came the bird and took the gold chain in his right claw, perched in
front of the goldsmith, and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;
    It was my father who ate of me;
    It was my sister Marjory
    Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

Then the bird flew to a shoemaker's, and perched on his roof, and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;
    It was my father who ate of me;
    It was my sister Marjory
    Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

When the shoemaker heard, he ran out of his door in his shirt sleeves
and looked up at the roof of his house, holding his hand to shade his
eyes from the sun.

"Bird," said he, "how beautifully you sing!"

Then he called in at his door,

"Wife, come out directly; here is a bird singing beautifully; only
listen."

Then he called his daughter, all his children, and acquaintance, both
young men and maidens, and they came up the street and gazed on the
bird, and saw how beautiful it was with red and green feathers, and
round its throat was as it were gold, and its eyes twinkled in its head
like stars.

"Bird," said the shoemaker, "do sing that piece over again."

"No," said the bird, "I may not sing for nothing twice; you must give me
something."

"Wife," said the man, "go into the shop; on the top shelf stands a pair
of red shoes; bring them here."

So the wife went and brought the shoes.

"Now bird," said the man, "sing us that piece again."

And the bird came down and took the shoes in his left claw, and flew up
again to the roof, and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;
    It was my father who ate of me;
    It was my sister Marjory
    Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

And when he had finished he flew away, with the chain in his right claw
and the shoes in his left claw, and he flew till he reached a mill, and
the mill went "clip-clap, clip-clap, clip-clap." And in the mill sat
twenty millers-men hewing a millstone--"hick-hack, hick-hack,
hick-hack," while the mill was going "clip-clap, clip-clap, clip-clap."
And the bird perched on a linden tree that stood in front of the mill,
and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;"

Here one of the men looked up.

    "It was my father who ate of me;"

Then two more looked up and listened.

    "It was my sister Marjory"

Here four more looked up.

    "Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,"

Now there were only eight left hewing.

    "And laid them under the almond tree."

Now only five.

    "Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,"

Now only one.

    "Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

At length the last one left off, and he only heard the end.

"Bird," said he, "how beautifully you sing; let me hear it all; sing
that again!"

"No," said the bird, "I may not sing it twice for nothing; if you will
give me the millstone I will sing it again."

"Indeed," said the man, "if it belonged to me alone you should have it."

"All right," said the others, "if he sings again he shall have it."

Then the bird came down, and all the twenty millers heaved up the stone
with poles--"yo! heave-ho! yo! heave-ho!" and the bird stuck his head
through the hole in the middle, and with the millstone round his neck he
flew up to the tree and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;
    It was my father who ate of me;
    It was my sister Marjory
    Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

And when he had finished, he spread his wings, having in the right claw
the chain, and in the left claw the shoes, and round his neck the
millstone, and he flew away to his father's house.

In the parlour sat the father, the mother, and Marjory at the table; the
father said,

"How light-hearted and cheerful I feel."

"Nay," said the mother, "I feel very low, just as if a great storm were
coming."

But Marjory sat weeping; and the bird came flying, and perched on the
roof.

"Oh," said the father, "I feel so joyful, and the sun is shining so
bright; it is as if I were going to meet with an old friend."

"Nay," said the wife, "I am terrified, my teeth chatter, and there is
fire in my veins," and she tore open her dress to get air; and Marjory
sat in a corner and wept, with her plate before her, until it was quite
full of tears. Then the bird perched on the almond tree, and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;"

And the mother stopped her ears and hid her eyes, and would neither see
nor hear; nevertheless, the noise of a fearful storm was in her ears,
and in her eyes a quivering and burning as of lightning.

    "It was my father who ate of me;"

"O mother!" said the father, "there is a beautiful bird singing so
finely, and the sun shines, and everything smells as sweet as cinnamon.

    "It was my sister Marjory"

Marjory hid her face in her lap and wept, and the father said,

"I must go out to see the bird."

"Oh do not go!" said the wife, "I feel as if the house were on fire."

But the man went out and looked at the bird.

    "Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

With that the bird let fall the gold chain upon his father's neck, and
it fitted him exactly. So he went indoors and said,

"Look what a beautiful chain the bird has given me."

Then his wife was so terrified that she fell all along on the floor, and
her cap came off. Then the bird began again to sing,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;"

"Oh," groaned the mother, "that I were a thousand fathoms under ground,
so as not to be obliged to hear it."

    "It was my father who ate of me;"

Then the woman lay as if she were dead.

    "It was my sister Marjory"

"Oh," said Marjory, "I will go out, too, and see if the bird will give
me anything." And so she went.

    "Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,"

Then he threw the shoes down to her.

    "And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

And poor Marjory all at once felt happy and joyful, and put on her red
shoes, and danced and jumped for joy.

"Oh dear," said she, "I felt so sad before I went outside, and now my
heart is so light! He is a charming bird to have given me a pair of red
shoes."

But the mother's hair stood on end, and looked like flame, and she said,

"Even if the world is coming to an end, I must go out for a little
relief."

Just as she came outside the door, crash went the millstone on her head,
and crushed her flat. The father and daughter rushed out, and saw smoke
and flames of fire rise up; but when that had gone by, there stood the
little brother; and he took his father and Marjory by the hand, and they
felt very happy and content, and went indoors, and sat to the table, and
had their dinner.




OLD SULTAN


THERE was once a peasant who owned a faithful dog called Sultan, now
grown so old that he had lost all his teeth, and could lay hold of
nothing. One day the man was standing at the door of his house with his
wife, and he said,

"I shall kill old Sultan to-morrow; he is of no good any longer."

His wife felt sorry for the poor dog, and answered, "He has served us
for so many years, and has kept with us so faithfully, he deserves food
and shelter in his old age."

"Dear me, you do not seem to understand the matter," said the husband;
"he has never a tooth, and no thief would mind him in the least, so I do
not see why he should not be made away with. If he has served us well,
we have given him plenty of good food."

The poor dog, who was lying stretched out in the sun not far off, heard
all they said, and was very sad to think that the next day would be his
last. He bethought him of his great friend the wolf, and slipped out in
the evening to the wood to see him, and related to him the fate that was
awaiting him.

"Listen to me, old fellow," said the wolf; "be of good courage, I will
help you in your need. I have thought of a way. Early to-morrow morning
your master is going hay-making with his wife, and they will take their
child with them, so that no one will be left at home. They will be sure
to lay the child in the shade behind the hedge while they are at work;
you must lie by its side, just as if you were watching it. Then I will
come out of the wood and steal away the child; you must rush after me,
as if to save it from me. Then I must let it fall, and you must bring it
back again to its parents, who will think that you have saved it, and
will be much too grateful to do you any harm; on the contrary, you will
be received into full favour, and they will never let you want for
anything again."

The dog was pleased with the plan, which was carried out accordingly.
When the father saw the wolf running away with his child he cried out,
and when old Sultan brought it back again, he was much pleased with him,
and patted him, saying,

"Not a hair of him shall be touched; he shall have food and shelter as
long as he lives." And he said to his wife,

"Go home directly and make some good stew for old Sultan, something that
does not need biting; and get the pillow from my bed for him to lie on."

From that time old Sultan was made so comfortable that he had nothing
left to wish for. Before long the wolf paid him a visit, to congratulate
him that all had gone so well.

"But, old fellow," said he, "you must wink at my making off by chance
with a fat sheep of your master's; perhaps one will escape some fine
day."

"Don't reckon on that," answered the dog; "I cannot consent to it; I
must remain true to my master."

But the wolf, not supposing it was said in earnest, came sneaking in the
night to carry off the sheep. But the master, who had been warned by the
faithful Sultan of the wolf's intention, was waiting for him, and gave
him a fine hiding with the threshing-flail. So the wolf had to make his
escape, calling out to the dog,

"You shall pay for this, you traitor!"

The next morning the wolf sent the wild boar to call out the dog; and to
appoint a meeting in the wood to receive satisfaction from him. Old
Sultan could find no second but a cat with three legs; and as they set
off together, the poor thing went limping along, holding her tail up in
the air. The wolf and his second were already on the spot; when they saw
their antagonists coming, and caught sight of the elevated tail of the
cat, they thought it was a sabre they were bringing with them. And as
the poor thing came limping on three legs, they supposed it was lifting
a big stone to throw at them. This frightened them very much; the wild
boar crept among the leaves, and the wolf clambered up into a tree. And
when the dog and cat came up, they were surprised not to see any one
there. However, the wild boar was not perfectly hidden in the leaves,
and the tips of his ears peeped out. And when the cat caught sight of
one, she thought it was a mouse, and sprang upon it, seizing it with her
teeth. Out leaped the wild boar with a dreadful cry, and ran away
shouting,

"There is the culprit in the tree!"

And the dog and the cat looking up caught sight of the wolf, who came
down, quite ashamed of his timidity, and made peace with the dog once
more.




THE SIX SWANS


ONCE on a time a king was hunting in a great wood, and he pursued a wild
animal so eagerly that none of his people could follow him. When evening
came he stood still, and looking round him he found that he had lost his
way; and seeking a path, he found none. Then all at once he saw an old
woman with a nodding head coming up to him; and it was a witch.

"My good woman," said he, "can you show me the way out of the wood?"

"Oh yes, my lord king," answered she, "certainly I can; but I must make
a condition, and if you do not fulfil it, you will never get out of the
wood again, but die there of hunger."

"What is the condition?" asked the king.

"I have a daughter," said the old woman, "who is as fair as any in the
world, and if you will take her for your bride, and make her queen, I
will show you the way out of the wood."

The king consented, because of the difficulty he was in, and the old
woman led him into her little house, and there her daughter was sitting
by the fire.

[Illustration: THE SIX SWANS

    "THE SWANS CAME CLOSE UP TO
    HER WITH RUSHING WINGS; &
    STOOPED ROUND HER; SO THAT
    SHE COULD THROW THE SHIRTS
    OVER THEM."]

She received the king just as if she had been expecting him, and though
he saw that she was very beautiful, she did not please him, and he could
not look at her without an inward shudder. Nevertheless, he took the
maiden before him on his horse, and the old woman showed him the way,
and soon he was in his royal castle again, where the wedding was
held.

The king had been married before, and his first wife had left seven
children, six boys and one girl, whom he loved better than all the
world, and as he was afraid the step-mother might not behave well to
them, and perhaps would do them some mischief, he took them to a lonely
castle standing in the middle of a wood. There they remained hidden, for
the road to it was so hard to find that the king himself could not have
found it, had it not been for a clew of yarn, possessing wonderful
properties, that a wise woman had given him; when he threw it down
before him, it unrolled itself and showed him the way. And the king went
so often to see his dear children, that the queen was displeased at his
absence; and she became curious and wanted to know what he went out into
the wood for so often alone. She bribed his servants with much money,
and they showed her the secret, and told her of the clew of yarn, which
alone could point out the way; then she gave herself no rest until she
had found out where the king kept the clew, and then she made some
little white silk shirts, and sewed a charm in each, as she had learned
witchcraft of her mother. And once when the king had ridden to the hunt,
she took the little shirts and went into the wood, and the clew of yarn
showed her the way. The children seeing some one in the distance,
thought it was their dear father coming to see them, and came jumping
for joy to meet him. Then the wicked queen threw over each one of the
little shirts, and as soon as the shirts touched their bodies, they were
changed into swans, and flew away through the wood. So the queen went
home very pleased to think she had got rid of her step-children; but the
maiden had not run out with her brothers, and so the queen knew nothing
about her. The next day the king went to see his children, but he found
nobody but his daughter.

"Where are thy brothers?" asked the king.

"Ah, dear father," answered she, "they are gone away and have left me
behind," and then she told him how she had seen from her window her
brothers in the guise of swans fly away through the wood, and she showed
him the feathers which they had let fall in the courtyard, and which she
had picked up. The king was grieved, but he never dreamt that it was
the queen who had done this wicked deed, and as he feared lest the
maiden also should be stolen away from him, he wished to take her away
with him. But she was afraid of the step-mother, and begged the king to
let her remain one more night in the castle in the wood.

Then she said to herself,

"I must stay here no longer, but go and seek for my brothers."

And when the night came, she fled away and went straight into the wood.
She went on all that night and the next day, until she could go no
longer for weariness. At last she saw a rude hut, and she went in and
found a room with six little beds in it; she did not dare to lie down in
one, but she crept under one and lay on the hard boards and wished for
night. When it was near the time of sun-setting she heard a rustling
sound, and saw six swans come flying in at the window. They alighted on
the ground, and blew at one another until they had blown all their
feathers off, and then they stripped off their swan-skin as if it had
been a shirt. And the maiden looked at them and knew them for her
brothers, and was very glad, and crept from under the bed. The brothers
were not less glad when their sister appeared, but their joy did not
last long.

"You must not stay here," said they to her; "this is a robbers' haunt,
and if they were to come and find you here, they would kill you."

"And cannot you defend me?" asked the little sister.

"No," answered they, "for we can only get rid of our swan-skins and keep
our human shape every evening for a quarter of an hour, but after that
we must be changed again into swans."

Their sister wept at hearing this, and said,

"Can nothing be done to set you free?"

"Oh no," answered they, "the work would be too hard for you. For six
whole years you would be obliged never to speak or laugh, and make
during that time six little shirts out of aster-flowers. If you were to
let fall a single word before the work was ended, all would be of no
good."

And just as the brothers had finished telling her this, the quarter of
an hour came to an end, and they changed into swans and flew out of the
window.

But the maiden made up her mind to set her brothers free, even though it
should cost her her life. She left the hut, and going into the middle of
the wood, she climbed a tree, and there passed the night. The next
morning she set to work and gathered asters and began sewing them
together: as for speaking, there was no one to speak to, and as for
laughing, she had no mind to it; so she sat on and looked at nothing but
her work. When she had been going on like this for a long time, it
happened that the king of that country went a-hunting in the wood, and
some of his huntsmen came up to the tree in which the maiden sat. They
called out to her, saying, "Who art thou?" But she gave no answer. "Come
down," cried they; "we will do thee no harm." But she only shook her
head. And when they tormented her further with questions she threw down
to them her gold necklace, hoping they would be content with that. But
they would not leave off, so she threw down to them her girdle, and when
that was no good, her garters, and one after another everything she had
on and could possibly spare, until she had nothing left but her smock.
But all was no good, the huntsmen would not be put off any longer, and
they climbed the tree, carried the maiden off, and brought her to the
king. The king asked, "Who art thou? What wert thou doing in the tree?"
But she answered nothing. He spoke to her in all the languages he knew,
but she remained dumb: but, being very beautiful, the king inclined to
her, and he felt a great love rise up in his heart towards her; and
casting his mantle round her, he put her before him on his horse and
brought her to his castle. Then he caused rich clothing to be put upon
her, and her beauty shone as bright as the morning, but no word would
she utter. He seated her by his side at table, and her modesty and
gentle mien so pleased him, that he said,

"This maiden I choose for wife, and no other in all the world," and
accordingly after a few days they were married.

But the king had a wicked mother, who was displeased with the marriage,
and spoke ill of the young queen.

"Who knows where the maid can have come from?" said she, "and not able
to speak a word! She is not worthy of a king!"

After a year had passed, and the queen brought her first child into the
world, the old woman carried it away, and marked the queen's mouth with
blood as she lay sleeping. Then she went to the king and declared that
his wife was an eater of human flesh. The king would not believe such a
thing, and ordered that no one should do her any harm. And the queen
went on quietly sewing the shirts and caring for nothing else. The next
time that a fine boy was born, the wicked step-mother used the same
deceit, but the king would give no credence to her words, for he said,

"She is too tender and good to do any such thing, and if she were only
not dumb, and could justify herself, then her innocence would be as
clear as day."

When for the third time the old woman stole away the new-born child and
accused the queen, who was unable to say a word in her defence, the king
could do no other but give her up to justice, and she was sentenced to
suffer death by fire.

The day on which her sentence was to be carried out was the very last
one of the sixth year of the years during which she had neither spoken
nor laughed, to free her dear brothers from the evil spell. The six
shirts were ready, all except one which wanted the left sleeve. And when
she was led to the pile of wood, she carried the six shirts on her arm,
and when she mounted the pile and the fire was about to be kindled, all
at once she cried out aloud, for there were six swans coming flying
through the air; and she saw that her deliverance was near, and her
heart beat for joy. The swans came close up to her with rushing wings,
and stooped round her, so that she could throw the shirts over them; and
when that had been done the swan-skins fell off them, and her brothers
stood before her in their own bodies quite safe and sound; but as one
shirt wanted the left sleeve, so the youngest brother had a swan's wing
instead of a left arm. They embraced and kissed each other, and the
queen went up to the king, who looked on full of astonishment, and began
to speak to him and to say,

"Dearest husband, now I may dare to speak and tell you that I am
innocent, and have been falsely accused," and she related to him the
treachery of the step-mother, who had taken away the three children and
hidden them. And she was reconciled to the king with great joy, and the
wicked step-mother was bound to the stake on the pile of wood and burnt
to ashes.

And the king and queen lived many years with their six brothers in peace
and joy.




THE SLEEPING BEAUTY


IN times past there lived a king and queen, who said to each other every
day of their lives, "Would that we had a child!" and yet they had none.
But it happened once that when the queen was bathing, there came a frog
out of the water, and he squatted on the ground, and said to her,

"Thy wish shall be fulfilled; before a year has gone by, thou shalt
bring a daughter into the world."

And as the frog foretold, so it happened; and the queen bore a daughter
so beautiful that the king could not contain himself for joy, and he
ordained a great feast. Not only did he bid to it his relations,
friends, and acquaintances, but also the wise women, that they might be
kind and favourable to the child. There were thirteen of them in his
kingdom, but as he had only provided twelve golden plates for them to
eat from, one of them had to be left out. However, the feast was
celebrated with all splendour; and as it drew to an end, the wise women
stood forward to present to the child their wonderful gifts: one
bestowed virtue, one beauty, a third riches, and so on, whatever there
is in the world to wish for. And when eleven of them had said their say,
in came the uninvited thirteenth, burning to revenge herself, and
without greeting or respect, she cried with a loud voice,

"In the fifteenth year of her age the princess shall prick herself with
a spindle and shall fall down dead."

And without speaking one more word she turned away and left the hall.
Every one was terrified at her saying, when the twelfth came forward,
for she had not yet bestowed her gift, and though she could not do away
with the evil prophecy, yet she could soften it, so she said,

"The princess shall not die, but fall into a deep sleep for a hundred
years."

Now the king, being desirous of saving his child even from this
misfortune, gave commandment that all the spindles in his kingdom should
be burnt up.

The maiden grew up, adorned with all the gifts of the wise women; and
she was so lovely, modest, sweet, and kind and clever, that no one who
saw her could help loving her.

It happened one day, she being already fifteen years old, that the king
and queen rode abroad, and the maiden was left behind alone in the
castle. She wandered about into all the nooks and corners, and into all
the chambers and parlours, as the fancy took her, till at last she came
to an old tower. She climbed the narrow winding stair which led to a
little door, with a rusty key sticking out of the lock; she turned the
key, and the door opened, and there in the little room sat an old woman
with a spindle, diligently spinning her flax.

"Good day, mother," said the princess, "what are you doing?"

"I am spinning," answered the old woman, nodding her head.

"What thing is that that twists round so briskly?" asked the maiden, and
taking the spindle into her hand she began to spin; but no sooner had
she touched it than the evil prophecy was fulfilled, and she pricked her
finger with it. In that very moment she fell back upon the bed that
stood there, and lay in a deep sleep. And this sleep fell upon the whole
castle; the king and queen, who had returned and were in the great hall,
fell fast asleep, and with them the whole court. The horses in their
stalls, the dogs in the yard, the pigeons on the roof, the flies on the
wall, the very fire that flickered on the hearth, became still, and
slept like the rest; and the meat on the spit ceased roasting, and the
cook, who was going to pull the scullion's hair for some mistake he had
made, let him go, and went to sleep. And the wind ceased, and not a leaf
fell from the trees about the castle.

Then round about that place there grew a hedge of thorns thicker every
year, until at last the whole castle was hidden from view, and nothing
of it could be seen but the vane on the roof. And a rumour went abroad
in all that country of the beautiful sleeping Rosamond, for so was the
princess called; and from time to time many kings' sons came and tried
to force their way through the hedge; but it was impossible for them to
do so, for the thorns held fast together like strong hands, and the
young men were caught by them, and not being able to get free, there
died a lamentable death.

Many a long year afterwards there came a king's son into that country,
and heard an old man tell how there should be a castle standing behind
the hedge of thorns, and that there a beautiful enchanted princess named
Rosamond had slept for a hundred years, and with her the king and queen,
and the whole court. The old man had been told by his grandfather that
many king's sons had sought to pass the thorn-hedge, but had been caught
and pierced by the thorns, and had died a miserable death. Then said the
young man, "Nevertheless, I do not fear to try; I shall win through and
see the lovely Rosamond." The good old man tried to dissuade him, but he
would not listen to his words.

For now the hundred years were at an end, and the day had come when
Rosamond should be awakened. When the prince drew near the hedge of
thorns, it was changed into a hedge of beautiful large flowers, which
parted and bent aside to let him pass, and then closed behind him in a
thick hedge. When he reached the castle-yard, he saw the horses and
brindled hunting-dogs lying asleep, and on the roof the pigeons were
sitting with their heads under their wings. And when he came indoors,
the flies on the wall were asleep, the cook in the kitchen had his hand
uplifted to strike the scullion, and the kitchen-maid had the black fowl
on her lap ready to pluck. Then he mounted higher, and saw in the hall
the whole court lying asleep, and above them, on their thrones, slept
the king and the queen. And still he went farther, and all was so quiet
that he could hear his own breathing; and at last he came to the tower,
and went up the winding stair, and opened the door of the little room
where Rosamond lay. And when he saw her looking so lovely in her sleep,
he could not turn away his eyes; and presently he stooped and kissed
her, and she awaked, and opened her eyes, and looked very kindly on him.
And she rose, and they went forth together, and the king and the queen
and whole court waked up, and gazed on each other with great eyes of
wonderment. And the horses in the yard got up and shook themselves, the
hounds sprang up and wagged their tails, the pigeons on the roof drew
their heads from under their wings, looked round, and flew into the
field, the flies on the wall crept on a little farther, the kitchen fire
leapt up and blazed, and cooked the meat, the joint on the spit began to
roast, the cook gave the scullion such a box on the ear that he roared
out, and the maid went on plucking the fowl.

Then the wedding of the Prince and Rosamond was held with all splendour,
and they lived very happily together until their lives' end.




KING THRUSHBEARD


A KING had a daughter who was beautiful beyond measure, but so proud and
overbearing that none of her suitors were good enough for her; she not
only refused one after the other, but made a laughing-stock of them.
Once the king appointed a great feast, and bade all the marriageable men
to it from far and near. And they were all put in rows, according to
their rank and station; first came the kings, then the princes, the
dukes, the earls, the barons, and lastly the noblemen. The princess was
led in front of the rows, but she had a mocking epithet for each. One
was too fat, "What a tub!" said she. Another too tall, "Long and lean is
ill to be seen," said she. A third too short, "Fat and short, not fit to
court," said she. A fourth was too pale, "A regular death's-head;" a
fifth too red-faced, "A game-cock," she called him. The sixth was not
well-made enough, "Green wood ill dried!" cried she. So every one had
something against him, and she made especially merry over a good king
who was very tall, and whose chin had grown a little peaked.

"Only look," cried she, laughing, "he has a chin like a thrush's beak."

And from that time they called him King Thrushbeard. But the old king,
when he saw that his daughter mocked every one, and scorned all the
assembled suitors, swore in his anger that she should have the first
beggar that came to the door for a husband.

A few days afterwards came a travelling ballad-singer, and sang under
the window in hopes of a small alms. When the king heard of it, he said
that he must come in. And so the ballad-singer entered in his dirty
tattered garments, and sang before the king and his daughter; when he
had done, he asked for a small reward. But the king said,

"Thy song has so well pleased me, that I will give thee my daughter to
wife."

The princess was horrified; but the king said,

"I took an oath to give you to the first beggar that came, and so it
must be done."

There was no remedy. The priest was fetched, and she had to be married
to the ballad-singer out of hand. When all was done, the king said,

"Now, as you are a beggar-wife, you can stay no longer in my castle, so
off with you and your husband."

The beggar-man led her away, and she was obliged to go forth with him on
foot. On the way they came to a great wood, and she asked,

    "Oh, whose is this forest, so thick and so fine?"

He answered,

    "It is King Thrushbeard's, and might have been thine."

And she cried,

    "Oh, I was a silly young thing, I'm afeared,
    Would I had taken that good King Thrushbeard!"

Then they passed through a meadow, and she asked,

    "Oh, whose is this meadow, so green and so fine?"

He answered,

    "It is King Thrushbeard's, and might have been thine."

And she cried,

    "I was a silly young thing, I'm afeared,
    Would I had taken that good King Thrushbeard!"

Then they passed through a great town, and she asked,

    "Whose is this city, so great and so fine?"

He answered,

    "Oh, it is King Thrushbeard's, and might have been thine."

And she cried,

    "I was a silly young thing, I'm afeared,
    Would I had taken that good King Thrushbeard!"

Then said the beggar-man,

"It does not please me to hear you always wishing for another husband;
am I not good enough for you?"

At last they came to a very small house, and she said,

    "Oh dear me! what poor little house do I see?
    And whose, I would know, may the wretched hole be?"

The man answered,

"That is my house and thine, where we must live together."

She had to stoop before she could go in at the door.

"Where are the servants?" asked the king's daughter.

"What servants?" answered the beggar-man, "what you want to have done
you must do yourself. Make a fire quick, and put on water, and cook me
some food; I am very tired."

But the king's daughter understood nothing about fire-making and
cooking, and the beggar-man had to lend a hand himself in order to
manage it at all. And when they had eaten their poor fare, they went to
bed; but the man called up his wife very early in the morning, in order
to clean the house. For a few days they lived in this indifferent
manner, until they came to the end of their store.

"Wife," said the man, "this will not do, stopping here and earning
nothing; you must make baskets."

So he went out and cut willows, and brought them home; and she began to
weave them, but the hard twigs wounded her tender hands.

"I see this will not do," said the man, "you had better try spinning."

So she sat her down and tried to spin, but the harsh thread cut her soft
fingers, so that the blood flowed.

"Look now!" said the man, "you are no good at any sort of work; I made a
bad bargain when I took you. I must see what I can do to make a trade
of pots and earthen vessels; you can sit in the market and offer them
for sale."

"Oh dear!" thought she, "suppose while I am selling in the market people
belonging to my father's kingdom should see me, how they would mock at
me!"

But there was no help for it; she had to submit, or else die of hunger.

The first day all went well; the people bought her wares eagerly,
because she was so beautiful, and gave her whatever she asked, and some
of them gave her the money and left the pots after all behind them. And
they lived on these earnings as long as they lasted; and then the man
bought a number of new pots. So she seated herself in a corner of the
market, and stood the wares before her for sale. All at once a drunken
horse-soldier came plunging by, and rode straight into the midst of her
pots, breaking them into a thousand pieces. She could do nothing for
weeping.

"Oh dear, what will become of me," cried she; "what will my husband
say?" and she hastened home and told him her misfortune.

"Who ever heard of such a thing as sitting in the corner of the market
with earthenware pots!" said the man; "now leave off crying; I see you
are not fit for any regular work. I have been asking at your father's
castle if they want a kitchen-maid, and they say they don't mind taking
you; at any rate you will get your victuals free."

And the king's daughter became a kitchen-maid, to be at the cook's beck
and call, and to do the hardest work. In each of her pockets she
fastened a little pot, and brought home in them whatever was left, and
upon that she and her husband were fed. It happened one day, when the
wedding of the eldest prince was celebrated, the poor woman went
upstairs, and stood by the parlour door to see what was going on. And
when the place was lighted up, and the company arrived, each person
handsomer than the one before, and all was brilliancy and splendour, she
thought on her own fate with a sad heart, and bewailed her former pride
and haughtiness which had brought her so low, and plunged her in so
great poverty. And as the rich and delicate dishes smelling so good were
carried to and fro every now and then, the servants would throw her a
few fragments, which she put in her pockets, intending to take home.
And then the prince himself passed in clothed in silk and velvet, with a
gold chain round his neck. And when he saw the beautiful woman standing
in the doorway, he seized her hand and urged her to dance with him, but
she refused, all trembling, for she saw it was King Thrushbeard, who had
come to court her, whom she had turned away with mocking. It was of no
use her resisting, he drew her into the room; and all at once the band
to which her pockets were fastened broke, and the pots fell out, and the
soup ran about, and the fragments were scattered all round. And when the
people saw that, there was great laughter and mocking, and she felt so
ashamed, that she wished herself a thousand fathoms underground. She
rushed to the door to fly from the place, when a man caught her just on
the steps, and when she looked at him, it was King Thrushbeard again. He
said to her in a kind tone,

"Do not be afraid, I and the beggar-man with whom you lived in the
wretched little hut are one. For love of you I disguised myself, and it
was I who broke your pots in the guise of a horse-soldier. I did all
that to bring down your proud heart, and to punish your haughtiness,
which caused you to mock at me." Then she wept bitterly, and said,

"I have done great wrong, and am not worthy to be your wife."

But he said,

"Take courage, the evil days are gone over; now let us keep our
wedding-day."

Then came the ladies-in-waiting and put on her splendid clothing; and
her father came, and the whole court, and wished her joy on her marriage
with King Thrushbeard; and then the merry-making began in good earnest.
I cannot help wishing that you and I could have been there too.




[Illustration: SNOW-WHITE

    "QUEEN THOU ART OF BEAUTY RARE
    BUT SNOW-WHITE LIVING IN THE GLEN,
    WITH THE SEVEN LITTLE MEN,
    IS A THOUSAND TIMES MORE FAIR."]




SNOW-WHITE


IT was the middle of winter, and the snow-flakes were falling like
feathers from the sky, and a queen sat at her window working, and her
embroidery-frame was of ebony. And as she worked, gazing at times out on
the snow, she pricked her finger, and there fell from it three drops of
blood on the snow. And when she saw how bright and red it looked, she
said to herself, "Oh that I had a child as white as snow, as red as
blood, and as black as the wood of the embroidery frame!"

Not very long after she had a daughter, with a skin as white as snow,
lips as red as blood, and hair as black as ebony, and she was named
Snow-white. And when she was born the queen died.

After a year had gone by the king took another wife, a beautiful woman,
but proud and overbearing, and she could not bear to be surpassed in
beauty by any one. She had a magic looking-glass, and she used to stand
before it, and look in it, and say,

    "Looking-glass upon the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?"

And the looking-glass would answer,

    "You are fairest of them all."

And she was contented, for she knew that the looking-glass spoke the
truth.

Now, Snow-white was growing prettier and prettier, and when she was
seven years old she was as beautiful as day, far more so than the queen
herself. So one day when the queen went to her mirror and said,

    "Looking-glass upon the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?"

It answered,

    "Queen, you are full fair, 'tis true,
    But Snow-white fairer is than you."

This gave the queen a great shock, and she became yellow and green with
envy, and from that hour her heart turned against Snow-white, and she
hated her. And envy and pride like ill weeds grew in her heart higher
every day, until she had no peace day or night. At last she sent for a
huntsman, and said,

"Take the child out into the woods, so that I may set eyes on her no
more. You must put her to death, and bring me her heart for a token."

The huntsman consented, and led her away; but when he drew his cutlass
to pierce Snow-white's innocent heart, she began to weep, and to say,

"Oh, dear huntsman, do not take my life; I will go away into the wild
wood, and never come home again."

And as she was so lovely the huntsman had pity on her, and said,

"Away with you then, poor child;" for he thought the wild animals would
be sure to devour her, and it was as if a stone had been rolled away
from his heart when he spared to put her to death. Just at that moment a
young wild boar came running by, so he caught and killed it, and taking
out its heart, he brought it to the queen for a token. And it was salted
and cooked, and the wicked woman ate it up, thinking that there was an
end of Snow-white.

Now, when the poor child found herself quite alone in the wild woods,
she felt full of terror, even of the very leaves on the trees, and she
did not know what to do for fright. Then she began to run over the sharp
stones and through the thorn bushes, and the wild beasts after her, but
they did her no harm. She ran as long as her feet would carry her; and
when the evening drew near she came to a little house, and she went
inside to rest. Everything there was very small, but as pretty and clean
as possible. There stood the little table ready laid, and covered with a
white cloth, and seven little plates, and seven knives and forks, and
drinking-cups. By the wall stood seven little beds, side by side,
covered with clean white quilts. Snow-white, being very hungry and
thirsty, ate from each plate a little porridge and bread, and drank out
of each little cup a drop of wine, so as not to finish up one portion
alone. After that she felt so tired that she lay down on one of the
beds, but it did not seem to suit her; one was too long, another too
short, but at last the seventh was quite right; and so she lay down upon
it, committed herself to heaven, and fell asleep.

When it was quite dark, the masters of the house came home. They were
seven dwarfs, whose occupation was to dig underground among the
mountains. When they had lighted their seven candles, and it was quite
light in the little house, they saw that some one must have been in, as
everything was not in the same order in which they left it. The first
said,

"Who has been sitting in my little chair?"

The second said,

"Who has been eating from my little plate?"

The third said,

"Who has been taking my little loaf?"

The fourth said,

"Who has been tasting my porridge?"

The fifth said,

"Who has been using my little fork?"

The sixth said,

"Who has been cutting with my little knife?"

The seventh said,

"Who has been drinking from my little cup?"

Then the first one, looking round, saw a hollow in his bed, and cried,

"Who has been lying on my bed?"

And the others came running, and cried,

"Some one has been on our beds too!"

But when the seventh looked at his bed, he saw little Snow-white lying
there asleep. Then he told the others, who came running up, crying out
in their astonishment, and holding up their seven little candles to
throw a light upon Snow-white.

"O goodness! O gracious!" cried they, "what beautiful child is this?"
and were so full of joy to see her that they did not wake her, but let
her sleep on. And the seventh dwarf slept with his comrades, an hour at
a time with each, until the night had passed.

When it was morning, and Snow-white awoke and saw the seven dwarfs, she
was very frightened; but they seemed quite friendly, and asked her what
her name was, and she told them; and then they asked how she came to be
in their house. And she related to them how her step-mother had wished
her to be put to death, and how the huntsman had spared her life, and
how she had run the whole day long, until at last she had found their
little house. Then the dwarfs said,

"If you will keep our house for us, and cook, and wash, and make the
beds, and sew and knit, and keep everything tidy and clean, you may stay
with us, and you shall lack nothing."

"With all my heart," said Snow-white; and so she stayed, and kept the
house in good order. In the morning the dwarfs went to the mountain to
dig for gold; in the evening they came home, and their supper had to be
ready for them. All the day long the maiden was left alone, and the good
little dwarfs warned her, saying,

"Beware of your step-mother, she will soon know you are here. Let no one
into the house."

Now the queen, having eaten Snow-white's heart, as she supposed, felt
quite sure that now she was the first and fairest, and so she came to
her mirror, and said,

    "Looking-glass upon the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?"

And the glass answered,

    "Queen, thou art of beauty rare,
    But Snow-white living in the glen
    With the seven little men
    Is a thousand times more fair."

Then she was very angry, for the glass always spoke the truth, and she
knew that the huntsman must have deceived her, and that Snow-white must
still be living. And she thought and thought how she could manage to
make an end of her, for as long as she was not the fairest in the land,
envy left her no rest. At last she thought of a plan; she painted her
face and dressed herself like an old pedlar woman, so that no one would
have known her. In this disguise she went across the seven mountains,
until she came to the house of the seven little dwarfs, and she knocked
at the door and cried,

"Fine wares to sell! fine wares to sell!"

Snow-white peeped out of the window and cried,

"Good-day, good woman, what have you to sell?"

"Good wares, fine wares," answered she, "laces of all colours;" and she
held up a piece that was woven of variegated silk.

"I need not be afraid of letting in this good woman," thought
Snow-white, and she unbarred the door and bought the pretty lace.

"What a figure you are, child!" said the old woman, "come and let me
lace you properly for once."

Snow-white, suspecting nothing, stood up before her, and let her lace
her with the new lace; but the old woman laced so quick and tight that
it took Snow-white's breath away, and she fell down as dead.

"Now you have done with being the fairest," said the old woman as she
hastened away.

Not long after that, towards evening, the seven dwarfs came home, and
were terrified to see their dear Snow-white lying on the ground, without
life or motion; they raised her up, and when they saw how tightly she
was laced they cut the lace in two; then she began to draw breath, and
little by little she returned to life. When the dwarfs heard what had
happened they said,

"The old pedlar woman was no other than the wicked queen; you must
beware of letting any one in when we are not here!"

And when the wicked woman got home she went to her glass and said,

    "Looking-glass against the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?"

And it answered as before,

    "Queen, thou art of beauty rare,
    But Snow-white living in the glen
    With the seven little men
    Is a thousand times more fair."

When she heard that she was so struck with surprise that all the blood
left her heart, for she knew that Snow-white must still be living.

"But now," said she, "I will think of something that will be her ruin."
And by witchcraft she made a poisoned comb. Then she dressed herself up
to look like another different sort of old woman. So she went across the
seven mountains and came to the house of the seven dwarfs, and knocked
at the door and cried,

"Good wares to sell! good wares to sell!"

Snow-white looked out and said,

"Go away, I must not let anybody in."

"But you are not forbidden to look," said the old woman, taking out the
poisoned comb and holding it up. It pleased the poor child so much that
she was tempted to open the door; and when the bargain was made the old
woman said,

"Now, for once your hair shall be properly combed."

Poor Snow-white, thinking no harm, let the old woman do as she would,
but no sooner was the comb put in her hair than the poison began to
work, and the poor girl fell down senseless.

"Now, you paragon of beauty," said the wicked woman, "this is the end of
you," and went off. By good luck it was now near evening, and the seven
little dwarfs came home. When they saw Snow-white lying on the ground as
dead, they thought directly that it was the step-mother's doing, and
looked about, found the poisoned comb, and no sooner had they drawn it
out of her hair than Snow-white came to herself, and related all that
had passed. Then they warned her once more to be on her guard, and never
again to let any one in at the door.

And the queen went home and stood before the looking-glass and said,

    "Looking-glass against the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?"

And the looking-glass answered as before,

    "Queen, thou art of beauty rare,
    But Snow-white living in the glen
    With the seven little men
    Is a thousand times more fair."

When she heard the looking-glass speak thus she trembled and shook with
anger.

"Snow-white shall die," cried she, "though it should cost me my own
life!" And then she went to a secret lonely chamber, where no one was
likely to come, and there she made a poisonous apple. It was beautiful
to look upon, being white with red cheeks, so that any one who should
see it must long for it, but whoever ate even a little bit of it must
die. When the apple was ready she painted her face and clothed herself
like a peasant woman, and went across the seven mountains to where the
seven dwarfs lived. And when she knocked at the door Snow-white put her
head out of the window and said,

"I dare not let anybody in; the seven dwarfs told me not."

"All right," answered the woman; "I can easily get rid of my apples
elsewhere. There, I will give you one."

"No," answered Snow-white, "I dare not take anything."

"Are you afraid of poison?" said the woman, "look here, I will cut the
apple in two pieces; you shall have the red side, I will have the white
one."

For the apple was so cunningly made, that all the poison was in the rosy
half of it. Snow-white longed for the beautiful apple, and as she saw
the peasant woman eating a piece of it she could no longer refrain, but
stretched out her hand and took the poisoned half. But no sooner had she
taken a morsel of it into her mouth than she fell to the earth as dead.
And the queen, casting on her a terrible glance, laughed aloud and
cried,

"As white as snow, as red as blood, as black as ebony! this time the
dwarfs will not be able to bring you to life again."

And when she went home and asked the looking-glass,

    "Looking-glass against the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?"

at last it answered,

"You are the fairest now of all."

Then her envious heart had peace, as much as an envious heart can have.

The dwarfs, when they came home in the evening, found Snow-white lying
on the ground, and there came no breath out of her mouth, and she was
dead. They lifted her up, sought if anything poisonous was to be found,
cut her laces, combed her hair, washed her with water and wine, but all
was of no avail, the poor child was dead, and remained dead. Then they
laid her on a bier, and sat all seven of them round it, and wept and
lamented three whole days. And then they would have buried her, but that
she looked still as if she were living, with her beautiful blooming
cheeks. So they said,

"We cannot hide her away in the black ground." And they had made a
coffin of clear glass, so as to be looked into from all sides, and they
laid her in it, and wrote in golden letters upon it her name, and that
she was a king's daughter. Then they set the coffin out upon the
mountain, and one of them always remained by it to watch. And the birds
came too, and mourned for Snow-white, first an owl, then a raven, and
lastly, a dove.

Now, for a long while Snow-white lay in the coffin and never changed,
but looked as if she were asleep, for she was still as white as snow,
as red as blood, and her hair was as black as ebony. It happened,
however, that one day a king's son rode through the wood and up to the
dwarfs' house, which was near it. He saw on the mountain the coffin, and
beautiful Snow-white within it, and he read what was written in golden
letters upon it. Then he said to the dwarfs,

"Let me have the coffin, and I will give you whatever you like to ask
for it."

But the dwarfs told him that they could not part with it for all the
gold in the world. But he said,

"I beseech you to give it me, for I cannot live without looking upon
Snow-white; if you consent I will bring you to great honour, and care
for you as if you were my brethren."

When he so spoke the good little dwarfs had pity upon him and gave him
the coffin, and the king's son called his servants and bid them carry it
away on their shoulders. Now it happened that as they were going along
they stumbled over a bush, and with the shaking the bit of poisoned
apple flew out of her throat. It was not long before she opened her
eyes, threw up the cover of the coffin, and sat up, alive and well.

"Oh dear! where am I?" cried she. The king's son answered, full of joy,
"You are near me," and, relating all that had happened, he said,

"I would rather have you than anything in the world; come with me to my
father's castle and you shall be my bride."

And Snow-white was kind, and went with him, and their wedding was held
with pomp and great splendour.

But Snow-white's wicked step-mother was also bidden to the feast, and
when she had dressed herself in beautiful clothes she went to her
looking-glass and said,

    "Looking-glass upon the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?"

The looking-glass answered,

    "O Queen, although you are of beauty rare,
    The young bride is a thousand times more fair."

Then she railed and cursed, and was beside herself with disappointment
and anger. First she thought she would not go to the wedding; but then
she felt she should have no peace until she went and saw the bride. And
when she saw her she knew her for Snow-white, and could not stir from
the place for anger and terror. For they had ready red-hot iron shoes,
in which she had to dance until she fell down dead.




The KNAPSACK, the HAT, and the HORN


ONCE there were three brothers, and they grew poorer and poorer, until
at last their need was so great that they had nothing left to bite or to
break. Then they said, "This will not do; we had better go out into the
world and seek our fortune."

So they set out, and went some distance through many green fields, but
they met with no good fortune. One day they came to a great wood, in the
midst of which was a hill, and when they came near to it, they saw that
it was all of silver. Then said the eldest,

"Now here is good fortune enough for me, and I desire no better."

And he took of the silver as much as he could carry, turned round, and
went back home. But the other two said,

"We must have something better than mere silver," and they would not
touch it, but went on farther. After they had gone on a few days longer,
they came to a hill that was all of gold. The second brother stood still
and considered, and was uncertain.

"What shall I do?" said he; "shall I take of the gold enough to last me
my life, or shall I go farther?"

At last, coming to a conclusion, he filled his pockets as full as they
would hold, bid good-bye to his brother, and went home. But the third
brother said to himself,

"Silver and gold do not tempt me; I will not gainsay fortune, who has
better things in store for me."

So he went on, and when he had journeyed for three days, he came to a
wood still greater than the former ones, so that there was no end to it;
and in it he found nothing to eat or to drink, so that he was nearly
starving. He got up into a high tree, so as to see how far the wood
reached, but as far as his eyes could see, there was nothing but the
tops of the trees. And as he got down from the tree, hunger pressed him
sore, and he thought,

"Oh that for once I could have a good meal!"

And when he reached the ground he saw to his surprise a table beneath
the tree richly spread with food, and that smoked before him.

"This time at least," said he, "I have my wish," and without stopping to
ask who had brought the meal there, and who had cooked it, he came close
to the table and ate with relish, until his hunger was appeased. When he
had finished, he thought,

"It would be a pity to leave such a good table-cloth behind in the
wood," so he folded it up neatly and pocketed it. Then he walked on, and
in the evening, when hunger again seized him, he thought he would put
the table-cloth to the proof, and he brought it out and said,

"Now I desire that thou shouldst be spread with a good meal," and no
sooner were the words out of his mouth, than there stood on it as many
dishes of delicious food as there was room for.

"Now that I see," said he, "what sort of a cook thou art, I hold thee
dearer than the mountains of silver and of gold," for he perceived that
it was a wishing-cloth. Still he was not satisfied to settle down at
home with only a wishing-cloth, so he determined to wander farther
through the world and seek his fortune. One evening, in a lonely wood,
he came upon a begrimed charcoal-burner at his furnace, who had put some
potatoes to roast for his supper.

"Good evening, my black fellow," said he, "how do you get on in this
lonely spot?"

"One day is like another," answered the charcoal-burner: "every evening
I have potatoes; have you a mind to be my guest?"

"Many thanks," answered the traveller, "I will not deprive you; you did
not expect a guest; but if you do not object, you shall be the one to be
invited."

"How can that be managed?" said the charcoal-burner; "I see that you
have nothing with you, and if you were to walk two hours in any
direction, you would meet with no one to give you anything."

"For all that," answered he, "there shall be a feast so good, that you
have never tasted the like."

Then he took out the table-cloth from his knapsack, and spreading it on
the ground, said,

"Cloth, be covered," and immediately there appeared boiled and roast
meat, quite hot, as if it had just come from the kitchen. The
charcoal-burner stared, but did not stay to be asked twice, and fell to,
filling his black mouth with ever bigger and bigger pieces. When they
had finished eating, the charcoal-burner smiled, and said,

"Look here, I approve of your table-cloth; it would not be a bad thing
for me to have here in the wood, where the cooking is not first-rate. I
will strike a bargain with you. There hangs a soldier's knapsack in the
corner, which looks old and unsightly, but it has wonderful qualities;
as I have no further occasion for it, I will give it to you in exchange
for the table-cloth."

"First, I must know what these wonderful qualities are," returned the
other.

"I will tell you," answered the charcoal-burner; "if you strike it with
your hand, there will appear a corporal and six men with swords and
muskets, and whatever you wish to have done, that will they do."

"Well, for my part," said the other, "I am quite willing to make the
exchange." And he gave the table-cloth to the charcoal-burner, took down
the knapsack from its hook, slung it over his shoulder, and took his
leave. Before he had gone far he began to want to make a trial of his
wonderful knapsack, so he struck it a blow. At once seven soldiers
appeared before him, and the corporal said,

"What does my lord and master please to want?"

"March in haste to the charcoal-burner and demand my wishing-cloth
back," said the man. They wheeled round to the left, and were not long
before they had accomplished his desire, and taken away, without wasting
many words, the wishing-cloth from the charcoal-burner. Having dismissed
them, he wandered on, expecting still more wonderful luck. About sunset
he fell in with another charcoal-burner, who was getting his supper
ready at the fire.

"Will you join me?" said this black fellow; "potatoes and salt, without
butter; sit down to it with me."

"No," answered he, "this time you shall be my guest." And he spread out
his table-cloth, and it was directly covered with the most delicious
victuals. So they ate and drank together and were merry. After the meal
was over the charcoal-burner said,

"Over there, on the bench, lies an old worn-out hat, which has wonderful
properties: if you put it on and draw it well over your head it is as if
a dozen field-pieces went off, one after the other, shooting everything
down, so that no one can stand against them. This hat is of no use to
me, and I will give it to you in exchange for the table-cloth."

"All right," answered the other, taking the hat and carrying it off, and
leaving the table-cloth behind him. Before he had gone far he struck
upon the knapsack, and summoned his soldiers to fetch back the
table-cloth again.

"First one thing, and then another," thought he, "just as if my luck
were never to end." And so it seemed, for at the end of another day's
journey he came up to another charcoal-burner, who was roasting his
potatoes just like the others. He invited him to eat with him off his
wishing-cloth, to which the charcoal-burner took such a fancy, that he
gave him for it a horn, which had different properties still from the
hat. If a man blew on it down fell all walls and fortresses, and finally
towns and villages in heaps. So the man gave the table-cloth in exchange
for it to the charcoal-burner, afterwards sending his men to fetch it
back, so that at last he had in his possession knapsack, hat, and horn,
all at one time.

"Now," said he, "I am a made man, and it is time to go home again and
see how my brothers are faring."

When he reached home he found that his brothers had built themselves a
fine house with their silver and gold, and lived in clover. He went to
see them, but because he wore a half-worn-out coat, a shabby hat, and
the old knapsack on his back, they would not recognise him as their
brother. They mocked him and said,

"It is of no use your giving yourself out to be our brother; he who
scorned silver and gold, seeking for better fortune, will return in
great splendour, as a mighty king, not as a beggar-man." And they drove
him from their door. Then he flew into a great rage, and struck upon his
knapsack until a hundred and fifty men stood before him, rank and file.
He ordered them to surround his brothers' house, and that two of them
should take hazel-rods, and should beat the brothers until they knew who
he was. And there arose a terrible noise; the people ran together and
wished to rescue the brothers in their extremity, but they could do
nothing against the soldiers. It happened at last that the king of the
country heard of it, and he was indignant, and sent a captain with his
troops to drive the disturber of the peace out of the town: but the man
with his knapsack soon assembled a greater company, who beat back the
captain and his people, sending them off with bleeding noses. Then the
king said,

"This vagabond fellow must be put down," and he sent the next day a
larger company against him, but they could do nothing: for he assembled
more men than ever, and in order to bring them more quickly, he pulled
his hat twice lower over his brows; then the heavy guns came into play,
and the king's people were beaten and put to flight.

"Now," said he, "I shall not make peace until the king gives me his
daughter to wife, and lets me rule the whole kingdom in his name."

This he caused to be told to the king, who said to his daughter,

"This is a hard nut to crack; there is no choice but for me to do as he
asks; if I wish to have peace and keep the crown on my head, I must give
in to him."

So the wedding took place, but the king's daughter was angry that the
bridegroom should be a common man, who wore a shabby hat, and carried an
old knapsack. She wished very much to get rid of him, and thought day
and night how to manage it. Then it struck her that perhaps all his
wonder-working power lay in the knapsack, and she pretended to be very
fond of him, and when she had brought him into a good humour she
said,--"Pray lay aside that ugly knapsack; it misbecomes you so much
that I feel ashamed of you."

"My dear child," answered he, "this knapsack is my greatest treasure; so
long as I keep it I need not fear anything in the whole world," and then
he showed her with what wonderful qualities it was endowed. Then she
fell on his neck as if she would have kissed him, but, by a clever
trick, she slipped the knapsack over his shoulder and ran away with it.
As soon as she was alone she struck upon it and summoned the soldiers,
and bade them seize her husband and bring him to the king's palace. They
obeyed, and the false woman had many more to follow behind, so as to be
ready to drive him out of the country. He would have been quite done for
if he had not still kept the hat. As soon as he could get his hands free
he pulled it twice forward on his head; and then the cannon began to
thunder and beat all down, till at last the king's daughter had to come
and to beg pardon. And as she so movingly prayed and promised to behave
better, he raised her up and made peace with her. Then she grew very
kind to him, and seemed to love him very much, and he grew so deluded,
that one day he confided to her that even if he were deprived of his
knapsack nothing could be done against him as long as he should keep the
old hat. And when she knew the secret she waited until he had gone to
sleep; then she carried off the hat, and had him driven out into the
streets. Still the horn remained to him, and in great wrath he blew a
great blast upon it, and down came walls and fortresses, towns and
villages, and buried the king and his daughter among their ruins. If he
had not set down the horn when he did, and if he had blown a little
longer, all the houses would have tumbled down, and there would not have
been left one stone upon another. After this no one dared to withstand
him, and he made himself king over the whole country.




RUMPELSTILTSKIN


THERE was once a miller who was poor, but he had one beautiful daughter.
It happened one day that he came to speak with the king, and, to give
himself consequence, he told him that he had a daughter who could spin
gold out of straw. The king said to the miller,

"That is an art that pleases me well; if thy daughter is as clever as
you say, bring her to my castle to-morrow, that I may put her to the
proof."

When the girl was brought to him, he led her into a room that was quite
full of straw, and gave her a wheel and spindle, and said,

"Now set to work, and if by the early morning thou hast not spun this
straw to gold thou shalt die." And he shut the door himself, and left
her there alone.

And so the poor miller's daughter was left there sitting, and could not
think what to do for her life; she had no notion how to set to work to
spin gold from straw, and her distress grew so great that she began to
weep. Then all at once the door opened, and in came a little man, who
said,

"Good evening, miller's daughter; why are you crying?"

"Oh!" answered the girl, "I have got to spin gold out of straw, and I
don't understand the business."

Then the little man said,

"What will you give me if I spin it for you?"

"My necklace," said the girl.

The little man took the necklace, seated himself before the wheel, and
whirr, whirr, whirr! three times round and the bobbin was full; then he
took up another, and whirr, whirr, whirr! three times round, and that
was full; and so he went on till the morning, when all the straw had
been spun, and all the bobbins were full of gold. At sunrise came the
king, and when he saw the gold he was astonished and very much rejoiced,
for he was very avaricious. He had the miller's daughter taken into
another room filled with straw, much bigger than the last, and told her
that as she valued her life she must spin it all in one night. The girl
did not know what to do, so she began to cry, and then the door opened,
and the little man appeared and said,

"What will you give me if I spin all this straw into gold?"

"The ring from my finger," answered the girl.

So the little man took the ring, and began again to send the wheel
whirring round, and by the next morning all the straw was spun into
glistening gold. The king was rejoiced beyond measure at the sight, but
as he could never have enough of gold, he had the miller's daughter
taken into a still larger room full of straw, and said,

"This, too, must be spun in one night, and if you accomplish it you
shall be my wife." For he thought, "Although she is but a miller's
daughter, I am not likely to find any one richer in the whole world."

As soon as the girl was left alone, the little man appeared for the
third time and said,

"What will you give me if I spin the straw for you this time?"

"I have nothing left to give," answered the girl.

"Then you must promise me the first child you have after you are queen,"
said the little man.

"But who knows whether that will happen?" thought the girl; but as she
did not know what else to do in her necessity, she promised the little
man what he desired, upon which he began to spin, until all the straw
was gold. And when in the morning the king came and found all done
according to his wish, he caused the wedding to be held at once, and the
miller's pretty daughter became a queen.

In a year's time she brought a fine child into the world, and thought
no more of the little man; but one day he came suddenly into her room,
and said,

"Now give me what you promised me."

The queen was terrified greatly, and offered the little man all the
riches of the kingdom if he would only leave the child; but the little
man said,

"No, I would rather have something living than all the treasures of the
world."

Then the queen began to lament and to weep, so that the little man had
pity upon her.

"I will give you three days," said he, "and if at the end of that time
you cannot tell my name, you must give up the child to me."

Then the queen spent the whole night in thinking over all the names that
she had ever heard, and sent a messenger through the land to ask far and
wide for all the names that could be found. And when the little man came
next day, (beginning with Caspar, Melchior, Balthazar) she repeated all
she knew, and went through the whole list, but after each the little man
said,

"That is not my name."

The second day the queen sent to inquire of all the neighbours what the
servants were called, and told the little man all the most unusual and
singular names, saying,

"Perhaps you are called Roast-ribs, or Sheepshanks, or Spindleshanks?"
But he answered nothing but

"That is not my name."

The third day the messenger came back again, and said,

"I have not been able to find one single new name; but as I passed
through the woods I came to a high hill, and near it was a little house,
and before the house burned a fire, and round the fire danced a comical
little man, and he hopped on one leg and cried,

    "To-day do I bake, to-morrow I brew,
    The day after that the queen's child comes in;
    And oh! I am glad that nobody knew
    That the name I am called is Rumpelstiltskin!"

You cannot think how pleased the queen was to hear that name, and soon
afterwards, when the little man walked in and said, "Now, Mrs. Queen,
what is my name?" she said at first,

"Are you called Jack?"

"No," answered he.

"Are you called Harry?" she asked again.

"No," answered he. And then she said,

"Then perhaps your name is Rumpelstiltskin!"

"The devil told you that! the devil told you that!" cried the little
man, and in his anger he stamped with his right foot so hard that it
went into the ground above his knee; then he seized his left foot with
both his hands in such a fury that he split in two, and there was an end
of him.




ROLAND


THERE was once a woman who was a witch, and she had two daughters, one
ugly and wicked, whom she loved the best, because she was her very own
daughter, and one pretty and good, whom she hated because she was her
step-daughter. One day the step-daughter put on a pretty apron, which
the other daughter liked so much that she became envious, and said to
her mother that she must and should have the apron.

"Be content, my child," said the old woman, "thou shalt have it. Thy
step-sister has long deserved death, and to-night, while she is asleep,
I shall come and cut off her head. Take care to lie at the farthest side
of the bed, and push her to the outside."

And it would have been all over with the poor girl, if she had not been
standing in a corner near and heard it all. She did not dare to go
outside the door the whole day long, and when bed-time came the other
one got into bed first, so as to lie on the farthest side; but when she
had gone to sleep, the step-daughter pushed her towards the outside, and
took the inside place next the wall. In the night the old woman came
sneaking; in her right hand she held an axe, and with her left she felt
for the one who was lying outside, and then she heaved up the axe with
both hands, and hewed the head off her only daughter.

When she had gone away, the other girl got up and went to her
sweetheart's, who was called Roland, and knocked at his door. When he
came to her, she said,

"Listen, dear Roland, we must flee away in all haste; my step-mother
meant to put me to death, but she has killed her only child instead.
When the day breaks, and she sees what she has done, we are lost."

"But I advise you," said Roland, "to bring away her magic wand with you;
otherwise we cannot escape her when she comes after to overtake us." So
the maiden fetched the magic wand, and she took up the head of her
step-sister and let drop three drops of blood on the ground,--one by the
bed, one in the kitchen, and one on the steps. Then she hastened back to
her sweetheart.

When the old witch got up in the morning, she called out to her
daughter, to give her the apron, but no daughter came. Then she cried
out, "Where art thou?"

"Here, at the steps, sweeping!" answered one of the drops of blood.

The old woman went out, but she saw nobody at the steps, and cried
again, "Where art thou?"

"Here in the kitchen warming myself," cried the second drop of blood.

So she went into the kitchen and found no one. Then she cried again,
"Where art thou?"

"Oh, here in bed fast asleep!" cried the third drop of blood.

Then the mother went into the room, and up to the bed, and there lay her
only child, whose head she had cut off herself. The witch fell into a
great fury, rushed to the window, for from it she could see far and
wide, and she caught sight of her step-daughter, hastening away with her
dear Roland.

"It will be no good to you," cried she, "if you get ever so far away,
you cannot escape me." Then she put on her boots, which took her an
hour's walk at every stride, and it was not long before she had
overtaken them. But the maiden, when she saw the old woman striding up,
changed, by means of the magic wand, her dear Roland into a lake, and
herself into a duck swimming upon it. The witch stood on the bank and
threw in crumbs of bread, and took great pains to decoy the duck towards
her, but the duck would not be decoyed, and the old woman was obliged
to go back in the evening disappointed. Then the maiden and her dear
Roland took again their natural shapes, and travelled on the whole night
through until daybreak. Then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful
flower, standing in the middle of a hedge of thorns, and her dear Roland
into a fiddle-player. It was not long before the witch came striding up,
and she said to the musician,

"Dear musician, will you be so kind as to reach that pretty flower for
me?"

"Oh yes," said he, "I will strike up a tune to it."

Then as she crept quickly up to the hedge to break off the flower, for
she knew well who it was, he began to play, and whether she liked it or
not, she was obliged to dance, for there was magic in the tune. The
faster he played the higher she had to jump, and the thorns tore her
clothes, and scratched and wounded her, and he did not cease playing
until she was spent, and lay dead.

So now they were saved, and Roland said,

"I will go to my father and prepare for the wedding."

"And I will stay here," said the maiden, "and wait for you, and so that
no one should know me, I will change myself into a red milestone." So
away went Roland, and the maiden in the likeness of a stone waited in
the field for her beloved.

But when Roland went home he fell into the snares of another maiden, who
wrought so, that he forgot his first love.

And the poor girl waited a long time, but at last, seeing that he did
not come, she was filled with despair, and changed herself into a
flower, thinking "Perhaps some one in passing will put his foot upon me
and crush me."

But it happened that a shepherd, tending his flock, saw the flower, and
as it was so beautiful, he gathered it, took it home with him, and put
it in his chest. From that time everything went wonderfully well in the
shepherd's house. When he got up in the morning, all the work was
already done; the room was swept, the tables and benches rubbed, fire
kindled on the hearth, and water ready drawn; and when he came home in
the middle of the day, the table was laid, and a good meal spread upon
it. He could not understand how it was done, for he never saw anybody in
his house, and it was too little for anybody to hide in. The good
serving pleased him well; but in the end he became uneasy, and went to a
wise woman to take counsel of her. The wise woman said,

"There is magic in it: get up early some morning, and if you hear
something moving in the room, be it what it may, throw a white cloth
over it, and the charm will be broken."

The shepherd did as she told him, and the next morning at daybreak he
saw the chest open, and the flower come out. Then he jumped up quickly
and threw a white cloth over it. So the spell was broken, and a lovely
maiden stood before him; and she told him that she had been the flower,
and had until now cared for his household matters. She told him all that
had happened to her, and she pleased him so much that he asked her to
marry him, but she answered "No," because she still remained true to her
dear Roland, though he had forsaken her; but she promised not to leave
the shepherd, but to go on taking care of his house.

Now the time came when Roland's wedding was to be held; and there was an
old custom in that country that all the girls should be present, and
should sing in honour of the bride and bridegroom. The faithful maiden,
when she knew this, was so sorrowful that she felt as if her heart would
break; and she would not go, until the others came and fetched her. And
when her turn came to sing she slipped behind, so that she stood alone,
and so began to sing: and as soon as her song reached Roland's ear he
sprang up and cried,

"I know that voice! that is the right bride, and no other will I have."
And everything that he had forgotten, and that had been swept out of his
mind, came suddenly home to him in his heart. And the faithful maiden
was married to her dear Roland; her sorrow came to an end and her joy
began.




THE GOLDEN BIRD


IN times gone by there was a king who had at the back of his castle a
beautiful pleasure-garden, in which stood a tree that bore golden
apples. As the apples ripened they were counted, but one morning one was
missing. Then the king was angry, and he ordered that watch should be
kept about the tree every night. Now the king had three sons, and he
sent the eldest to spend the whole night in the garden; so he watched
till midnight, and then he could keep off sleep no longer, and in the
morning another apple was missing. The second son had to watch the
following night; but it fared no better, for when twelve o'clock had
struck he went to sleep, and in the morning another apple was missing.
Now came the turn of the third son to watch, and he was ready to do so;
but the king had less trust in him, and believed he would acquit himself
still worse than his brothers, but in the end he consented to let him
try. So the young man lay down under the tree to watch, and resolved
that sleep should not be master. When it struck twelve something came
rushing through the air, and he saw in the moonlight a bird flying
towards him, whose feathers glittered like gold. The bird perched upon
the tree, and had already pecked off an apple, when the young man let
fly an arrow at it. The bird flew away, but the arrow had struck its
plumage, and one of its golden feathers fell to the ground: the young
man picked it up, and taking it next morning to the king, told him what
had happened in the night. The king called his council together, and
all declared that such a feather was worth more than the whole kingdom.

[Illustration: THE GOLDEN BIRD

    "THE FOX SAID,
    NOW WHAT WILL YOU GIVE ME
    FOR MY REWARD?"]

"Since the feather is so valuable," said the king, "one is not enough
for me; I must and will have the whole bird."

So the eldest son set off, and relying on his own cleverness he thought
he should soon find the golden bird. When he had gone some distance he
saw a fox sitting at the edge of a wood, and he pointed his gun at him.
The fox cried out,

"Do not shoot me, and I will give you good counsel. You are on your way
to find the golden bird, and this evening you will come to a village, in
which two taverns stand facing each other. One will be brightly lighted
up, and there will be plenty of merriment going on inside; do not mind
about that, but go into the other one, although it will look to you very
uninviting."

"How can a silly beast give one any rational advice?" thought the king's
son, and let fly at the fox, but missed him, and he stretched out his
tail and ran quick into the wood. Then the young man went on his way,
and towards evening he came to the village, and there stood the two
taverns; in one singing and dancing was going on, the other looked quite
dull and wretched. "I should be a fool," said he, "to go into that
dismal place, while there is anything so good close by." So he went into
the merry inn, and there lived in clover, quite forgetting the bird and
his father, and all good counsel.

As time went on, and the eldest son never came home, the second son set
out to seek the golden bird. He met with the fox, just as the eldest
did, and received good advice from him without attending to it. And when
he came to the two taverns, his brother was standing and calling to him
at the window of one of them, out of which came sounds of merriment; so
he could not resist, but went in and revelled to his heart's content.

And then, as time went on, the youngest son wished to go forth, and to
try his luck, but his father would not consent.

"It would be useless," said he; "he is much less likely to find the bird
than his brothers, and if any misfortune were to happen to him he would
not know how to help himself; his wits are none of the best."

But at last, as there was no peace to be had, he let him go. By the side
of the wood sat the fox, begged him to spare his life, and gave him good
counsel. The young man was kind, and said,

"Be easy, little fox, I will do you no harm."

"You shall not repent of it," answered the fox, "and that you may get
there all the sooner, get up and sit on my tail."

And no sooner had he done so than the fox began to run, and off they
went over stock and stone, so that the wind whistled in their hair. When
they reached the village the young man got down, and, following the
fox's advice, went into the mean-looking tavern, without hesitating, and
there he passed a quiet night. The next morning, when he went out into
the field, the fox, who was sitting there already, said,

"I will tell you further what you have to do. Go straight on until you
come to a castle, before which a great band of soldiers lie, but do not
trouble yourself about them, for they will be all asleep and snoring;
pass through them and forward into the castle, and go through all the
rooms, until you come to one where there is a golden bird hanging in a
wooden cage. Near at hand will stand empty a golden cage of state, but
you must beware of taking the bird out of his ugly cage and putting him
into the fine one; if you do so you will come to harm."

After he had finished saying this the fox stretched out his tail again,
and the king's son sat him down upon it; then away they went over stock
and stone, so that the wind whistled through their hair. And when the
king's son reached the castle he found everything as the fox had said:
and he at last entered the room where the golden bird was hanging in a
wooden cage, while a golden one was standing by; the three golden apples
too were in the room. Then, thinking it foolish to let the beautiful
bird stay in that mean and ugly cage, he opened the door of it, took
hold of it, and put it in the golden one. In the same moment the bird
uttered a piercing cry. The soldiers awaked, rushed in, seized the
king's son and put him in prison. The next morning he was brought before
a judge, and, as he confessed everything, condemned to death. But the
king said he would spare his life on one condition, that he should bring
him the golden horse whose paces were swifter than the wind, and that
then he should also receive the golden bird as a reward.

So the king's son set off to find the golden horse, but he sighed, and
was very sad, for how should it be accomplished? And then he saw his old
friend the fox sitting by the roadside.

"Now, you see," said the fox, "all this has happened, because you would
not listen to me. But be of good courage, I will bring you through, and
will tell you how you are to get the golden horse. You must go straight
on until you come to a castle, where the horse stands in his stable;
before the stable-door the grooms will be lying, but they will all be
asleep and snoring; and you can go and quietly lead out the horse. But
one thing you must mind--take care to put upon him the plain saddle of
wood and leather, and not the golden one, which will hang close by;
otherwise it will go badly with you."

Then the fox stretched out his tail, and the king's son seated himself
upon it, and away they went over stock and stone until the wind whistled
through their hair. And everything happened just as the fox had said,
and he came to the stall where the golden horse was: and as he was about
to put on him the plain saddle, he thought to himself,

"Such a beautiful animal would be disgraced were I not to put on him the
good saddle, which becomes him so well." However, no sooner did the
horse feel the golden saddle touch him than he began to neigh. And the
grooms all awoke, seized the king's son and threw him into prison. The
next morning he was delivered up to justice and condemned to death, but
the king promised him his life, and also to bestow upon him the golden
horse, if he could convey thither the beautiful princess of the golden
castle.

With a heavy heart the king's son set out, but by great good luck he
soon met with the faithful fox.

"I ought now to leave you to your own ill-luck," said the fox, "but I am
sorry for you, and will once more help you in your need. Your way lies
straight up to the golden castle: you will arrive there in the evening,
and at night, when all is quiet, the beautiful princess goes to the
bath. And as she is entering the bathing-house, go up to her and give
her a kiss, then she will follow you, and you can lead her away; but do
not suffer her first to go and take leave of her parents, or it will go
ill with you."

Then the fox stretched out his tail; the king's son seated himself upon
it, and away they went over stock and stone, so that the wind whistled
through their hair. And when he came to the golden castle, all was as
the fox had said. He waited until midnight, when all lay in deep sleep,
and then as the beautiful princess went to the bathing-house he went up
to her and gave her a kiss, and she willingly promised to go with him,
but she begged him earnestly, and with tears, that he would let her
first go and take leave of her parents. At first he denied her prayer,
but as she wept so much the more, and fell at his feet, he gave in at
last. And no sooner had the princess reached her father's bedside than
he, and all who were in the castle, waked up, and the young man was
seized and thrown into prison.

The next morning the king said to him,

"Thy life is forfeit, but thou shalt find grace if thou canst level that
mountain that lies before my windows, and over which I am not able to
see: and if this is done within eight days thou shalt have my daughter
for a reward."

So the king's son set to work, and dug and shovelled away without
ceasing, but when, on the seventh day, he saw how little he had
accomplished, and that all his work was as nothing, he fell into great
sadness, and gave up all hope. But on the evening of the seventh day the
fox appeared, and said,

"You do not deserve that I should help you, but go now and lie down to
sleep, and I will do the work for you."

The next morning when he awoke, and looked out of the window, the
mountain had disappeared. The young man hastened full of joy to the
king, and told him that his behest was fulfilled, and, whether the king
liked it or not, he had to keep to his word, and let his daughter go.

So they both went away together, and it was not long before the faithful
fox came up to them.

"Well, you have got the best first," said he; "but you must know the
golden horse belongs to the princess of the golden castle."

"But how shall I get it?" asked the young man.

"I am going to tell you," answered the fox. "First, go to the king who
sent you to the golden castle, and take to him the beautiful princess.
There will then be very great rejoicing; he will willingly give you the
golden horse, and they will lead him out to you; then mount him without
delay, and stretch out your hand to each of them to take leave, and last
of all to the princess, and when you have her by the hand swing her up
on the horse behind you, and off you go! nobody will be able to overtake
you, for that horse goes swifter than the wind."

And so it was all happily done, and the king's son carried off the
beautiful princess on the golden horse. The fox did not stay behind, and
he said to the young man,

"Now, I will help you to get the golden bird. When you draw near the
castle where the bird is, let the lady alight, and I will take her under
my care; then you must ride the golden horse into the castle-yard, and
there will be great rejoicing to see it, and they will bring out to you
the golden bird; as soon as you have the cage in your hand, you must
start off back to us, and then you shall carry the lady away."

The plan was successfully carried out; and when the young man returned
with the treasure, the fox said,

"Now, what will you give me for my reward?"

"What would you like?" asked the young man.

"When we are passing through the wood, I desire that you should slay me,
and cut my head and feet off."

"That were a strange sign of gratitude," said the king's son, "and I
could not possibly do such a thing."

Then said the fox,

"If you will not do it, I must leave you; but before I go let me give
you some good advice. Beware of two things: buy no gallows-meat, and sit
at no brook-side." With that the fox ran off into the wood.

The young man thought to himself, "That is a wonderful animal, with most
singular ideas. How should any one buy gallows-meat? and I am sure I
have no particular fancy for sitting by a brook-side."

So he rode on with the beautiful princess, and their way led them
through the village where his two brothers had stayed. There they heard
great outcry and noise, and when he asked what it was all about, they
told him that two people were going to be hanged. And when he drew near
he saw that it was his two brothers, who had done all sorts of evil
tricks, and had wasted all their goods. He asked if there were no means
of setting them free.

"Oh yes! if you will buy them off," answered the people; "but why should
you spend your money in redeeming such worthless men?"

But he persisted in doing so; and when they were let go they all went on
their journey together.

After a while they came to the wood where the fox had met them first,
and there it seemed so cool and sheltered from the sun's burning rays
that the two brothers said,

"Let us rest here for a little by the brook, and eat and drink to
refresh ourselves."

The young man consented, quite forgetting the fox's warning, and he
seated himself by the brook-side, suspecting no evil. But the two
brothers thrust him backwards into the brook, seized the princess, the
horse, and the bird, and went home to their father.

"Is not this the golden bird that we bring?" said they; "and we have
also the golden horse, and the princess of the golden castle."

Then there was great rejoicing in the royal castle, but the horse did
not feed, the bird did not chirp, and the princess sat still and wept.

The youngest brother, however, had not perished. The brook was, by good
fortune, dry, and he fell on soft moss without receiving any hurt, but
he could not get up again. But in his need the faithful fox was not
lacking; he came up running, and reproached him for having forgotten his
advice.

"But I cannot forsake you all the same," said he; "I will help you back
again into daylight." So he told the young man to grasp his tail, and
hold on to it fast, and so he drew him up again.

"Still you are not quite out of all danger," said the fox; "your
brothers, not being certain of your death, have surrounded the wood with
sentinels, who are to put you to death if you let yourself be seen."

A poor beggar-man was sitting by the path, and the young man changed
clothes with him, and went clad in that wise into the king's courtyard.
Nobody knew him, but the bird began to chirp, and the horse began to
feed, and the beautiful princess ceased weeping.

"What does this mean?" said the king, astonished.

The princess answered,

"I cannot tell, except that I was sad, and now I am joyful; it is to me
as if my rightful bridegroom had returned."

Then she told him all that happened, although the two brothers had
threatened to put her to death if she let out anything. The king then
ordered every person who was in the castle to be brought before him, and
with the rest came the young man like a beggar in his wretched garments;
but the princess knew him, and greeted him well, falling on his neck and
kissing him. The wicked brothers were seized and put to death, and the
youngest brother was married to the princess, and succeeded to the
inheritance of his father.

But what became of the poor fox? Long afterwards the king's son was
going through the wood, and the fox met him and said,

"Now, you have everything that you can wish for, but my misfortunes
never come to an end, and it lies in your power to free me from them."
And once more he prayed the king's son earnestly to slay him, and cut
off his head and feet. So, at last, he consented, and no sooner was it
done than the fox was changed into a man, and was no other than the
brother of the beautiful princess; and thus he was set free from a spell
that had bound him for a long, long time.

And now, indeed, there lacked nothing to their happiness as long as they
lived.




The DOG and the SPARROW


THERE was once a sheep-dog whose master behaved ill to him and did not
give him enough to eat, and when for hunger he could bear it no longer,
he left his service very sadly. In the street he was met by a sparrow,
who said,

"Dog, my brother, why are you so sad?"

And the dog answered,

"I am hungry and have nothing to eat."

Then said the sparrow,

"Dear brother, come with me into the town; I will give you plenty."

Then they went together into the town, and soon they came to a butcher's
stall, and the sparrow said to the dog,

"Stay here while I reach you down a piece of meat," and he perched on
the stall, looked round to see that no one noticed him, and pecked,
pulled, and dragged so long at a piece that lay near the edge of the
board that at last it slid to the ground. The dog picked it up, ran with
it into a corner, and ate it up. Then said the sparrow,

"Now come with me to another stall, and I will get you another piece, so
that your hunger may be satisfied."

When the dog had devoured a second piece the sparrow asked,

"Dog, my brother, are you satisfied now?"

"Yes, as to meat I am," answered he, "but I have had no bread."

Then said the sparrow,

"That also shall you have; come with me." And he led him to a baker's
stall and pecked at a few little rolls until they fell to the ground,
and as the dog still wanted more, they went to another stall farther on
and got more bread. When that was done the sparrow said,

"Dog, my brother, are you satisfied yet?"

"Yes," answered he, "and now we will walk a little outside the town."

And they went together along the high road. It was warm weather, and
when they had gone a little way the dog said,

"I am tired, and would like to go to sleep."

"Well, do so," said the sparrow; "in the meanwhile I will sit near on a
bough." The dog laid himself in the road and fell fast asleep, and as he
lay there a waggoner came up with a waggon and three horses, laden with
two casks of wine; the sparrow, seeing that he was not going to turn
aside but kept in the beaten track, just where the dog lay, cried out,

"Waggoner, take care, or you shall suffer for it!"

But the waggoner, muttering, "What harm can you do to me?" cracked his
whip and drove his waggon over the dog, and he was crushed to death by
the wheels. Then the sparrow cried,

"Thou hast killed the dog my brother, and it shall cost thee horses and
cart!"

"Oh! horses and cart!" said the waggoner, "what harm can you do me, I
should like to know?" and drove on. The sparrow crept under the covering
of the waggon and pecked at the bung-hole of one of the casks until the
cork came out, and all the wine ran out without the waggoner noticing.
After a while, looking round, he saw that something dripped from the
waggon, and on examining the casks he found that one of them was empty,
and he cried out,

"I am a ruined man!"

"Not ruined enough yet!" said the sparrow, and flying to one of the
horses he perched on his head and pecked at his eyes. When the waggoner
saw that he took out his axe to hit the sparrow, who at that moment flew
aloft, and the waggoner missing him struck the horse on the head, so
that he fell down dead.

"Oh, I am a ruined man!" cried he.

"Not ruined enough yet!" said the sparrow, and as the waggoner drove on
with the two horses that were left the sparrow crept again under the
waggon-covering and pecked the cork out of the second cask, so that all
the wine leaked out. When the waggoner became aware of it, he cried out
again,

"Oh! I am a ruined man!" But the sparrow answered, "Not ruined enough
yet!" and perched on the second horse's head and began pecking at his
eyes. Back ran the waggoner and raised his axe to strike, but the
sparrow flying aloft, the stroke fell on the horse, so that he was
killed.

"Oh! I am a ruined man!" cried the waggoner.

"Not ruined enough yet!" said the sparrow, and perching on the third
horse began pecking at his eyes. The waggoner struck out in his anger at
the sparrow without taking aim, and missing him, he laid his third horse
dead.

"Oh! I am a ruined man!" he cried.

"Not ruined enough yet!" answered the sparrow, flying off; "I will see
to that at home."

So the waggoner had to leave his waggon standing, and went home full of
rage.

"Oh!" said he to his wife, "what ill-luck I have had! the wine is spilt,
and the horses are all three dead."

"O husband!" answered she, "such a terrible bird has come to this house;
he has brought with him all the birds of the air, and there they are in
the midst of our wheat devouring it." And he looked and there were
thousands upon thousands of birds sitting on the ground, having eaten up
all the wheat, and the sparrow in the midst, and the waggoner cried,

"Oh! I am a ruined man!"

"Not ruined enough yet!" answered the sparrow; "Waggoner, it shall cost
thee thy life!" and he flew away.

Now the waggoner, having lost everything he possessed, went in-doors and
sat down angry and miserable behind the stove. The sparrow was perched
outside on the window-sill, and cried, "Waggoner, it shall cost thee thy
life!" Then the waggoner seized his axe and threw it at the sparrow, but
it broke the window sash in two and did not touch the sparrow, who now
hopped inside, perched on the stove, and cried.

"Waggoner it shall cost thee thy life!" and he, mad and blind with rage,
beat in the stove, and as the sparrow flew from one spot to another,
hacked everything in pieces, furniture, looking-glasses, benches, table,
and the very walls of his house, and yet did not touch the sparrow.

At last he caught and held him in his hand.

"Now," said his wife, "shall I not kill him?"

"No!" cried he, "that were too easy a death; I will swallow him," and as
the bird was fluttering in the man's mouth, it stretched out its head,
saying,

"Waggoner, it shall cost thee thy life!"

Then the waggoner reached the axe to his wife saying,

"Wife, strike me this bird dead."

The wife struck, but missed her aim, and the blow fell on the waggoner's
head, and he dropped down dead.

But the sparrow flew over the hills and away.




FRED and KATE


THERE were once a young husband and wife, and their names were Fred and
Kate. One day said Fred,

"I must go now to my work in the fields, Kate, and when I come back you
must have on the table some roast meat to satisfy my hunger, and some
cool drink to quench my thirst."

"All right, Fred," answered Kate; "be off with you, I will see to it."

When dinner-time began to draw near, she took down a sausage from the
chimney, put it in a frying-pan with some butter, and stood it over the
fire. The sausage began to frizzle and fry, and Kate stood holding the
handle of the pan, and fell into deep thought; at last she said to
herself,

"While the sausage is cooking I might as well be drawing the beer in the
cellar."

So she saw that the frying-pan was standing firmly, and then took a can
and went down into the cellar to draw the beer. Now, while Kate was
watching the beer run into the can, a sudden thought came into her mind.

"Holloa! the dog is not fastened up; he may perhaps get at the sausage,"
and in a trice she was up the cellar steps: but already the dog had it
in his mouth, and was making off with it. Then Kate, with all haste,
followed after him and chased him a good way into the fields, but the
dog was quicker than Kate, and, never letting slip the sausage, was soon
at a great distance.

"Well, it can't be helped!" said Kate turning back, and as she had
tired herself with running, she took her time about going home, and
walked slowly to cool herself. All this time the beer was running out of
the cask, for Kate had not turned off the tap, and as the can was soon
full, it began to run over on the cellar floor, and ran, and ran, until
the cask was empty. Kate stood on the steps and saw the misfortune.

"Dear me!" cried she, "what am I to do to prevent Fred from noticing
it!"

She considered for a while, and then remembered that there was remaining
in the loft from the last fair time a sack of fine wheat-flour; she
determined to bring it down, and strew it over the beer.

"To be sure," said she, "those who know how to save have somewhat in
time of necessity."

And going up to the loft, she dragged the sack down and threw it right
upon the can full of beer, so that Fred's drink ran about the cellar
with the rest.

"It is all right," said Kate; "where some goes the rest must follow,"
and she strewed the meal all over the cellar. When all was done, she was
highly pleased, and thought how clean and neat it looked.

At dinner-time home came Fred.

"Now, wife, what have you got for me?" said he.

"O Fred," answered she, "I was going to cook a sausage for you, but
while I was drawing the beer the dog got it out of the pan, and while I
was running after the dog the beer all ran away, and as I was going to
stop up the beer with the wheat-meal I knocked over the can: but it is
all right now; the cellar is quite dry again." But said Fred,

"O Kate, Kate! what have you been about, letting the sausage be carried
off, and the beer run out of the cask, and then to waste all our good
meal into the bargain?"

"Well, Fred, I did not know; you should have told me," said Kate. So the
husband thought to himself,

"If my wife is like this, I must look after things a little better."

Now he had saved a very pretty sum of money, and he changed it all to
gold, and said to Kate,

"Do you see these yellow counters? I am going to make a hole in the
stable underneath the cows' manger and bury them; see that you do not
meddle with them, or it will be the worse for you."

And she said, "Oh no, Fred, certainly I won't."

Now, one day when Fred was away, there came some pedlars to the village,
with earthen pots and basins to sell, and they asked the young wife if
she had nothing to give in exchange for them.

"O my good men," said Kate, "I have no money to buy anything with, but
if you had any use for yellow counters, I might do some business with
you."

"Yellow counters! why not? we might as well see them," said they.

"Then go into the stable and dig under the cows' manger, and you will
find them; but I dare not go near the place."

So those rogues went and dug, and found the gold accordingly. And they
seized it quickly, and ran off with it, leaving the pots and pans behind
them in the house. Kate thought she must make some use of her new
possessions, so, as she had no need of them in the kitchen, she spread
them out on the ground, and then stuck them, one after another, for
ornament, on the fence which ran round the house. When Fred came home
and saw the new decorations, he said, "Kate, what have you been doing?"

"I bought them every one, Fred, with those yellow counters that were
buried under the manger, and I did not go there myself; the pedlars had
to dig them up for themselves."

"O wife!" cried Fred, "what have you done? they were not counters, but
pure gold, and all our capital; you should not have done so."

"Well, Fred, I did not know; you should have told me that before,"
answered Kate.

Then Kate stood still a little while to consider, and at last she said,
"Listen, Fred, we may be able to get the gold back again. Let us run
after the thieves."

"Very well," said Fred, "we will try; only let us take some bread and
cheese with us, that we may have something to eat on the way."

"All right," she answered. So they set out, and as Fred was a better
walker than Kate, she was soon left behind.

"All the better for me," said she, "for when we turn back I shall have
so much the less distance to go."

And they came to a mountain, where, on both sides of the road, there
were deep cart-ruts. And Kate said to herself,

"How sad to see the poor earth torn, and vexed, and oppressed in this
way! it will never be healed again in all its life."

And with a compassionate heart, she took out her butter and smeared the
cart-ruts right and left, so that they might not be so cut by the
wheels; and as she was stooping to perform this merciful act a cheese
fell out of her pocket and rolled down the mountain. And Kate said,

"I have walked over the ground once, and I am not going to do it again,
but another shall run after that cheese, and bring it back." So saying,
she took another cheese, and rolled it after the first one: and as it
did not seem to be coming back again, she sent a third racing after
them, thinking, "Perhaps they are waiting for company, and are not used
to travelling alone." But when they all three delayed coming, she said,

"I can't think what this means! perhaps it is that the third one has
lost his way, so I will send a fourth that he may call out to him as he
goes by." But it went no better with the fourth than with the third. And
Kate lost all patience and threw down the fifth and sixth, and that was
all. A long while she stood and waited for them to come up, but as still
they did not come, she said,

"Oh, it's like sending good money after bad; there is no getting you
back again. If you suppose I am going to wait for you any longer, you
are very much mistaken: I shall go on my way and you may overtake me;
your legs are younger than mine." Kate then went on until she overtook
Fred, who was standing still and waiting, as he wanted something to eat.

"Now, be quick," he said, "and hand over what you have brought." And she
handed him the dry bread.

"Now for the butter and the cheese," said the man.

"O Fred," said Kate, "I anointed the cart-ruts with the butter, and the
cheeses will soon be here, they are upon the road; one of them ran away,
and I sent the others to fetch it back."

Then said Fred,

"It was very wrong of you, Kate, to waste the butter, and roll the
cheeses down the hill."

And Kate answered, "Well then, you should have told me so."

As they were eating the dry bread together, Fred said,

"Kate, did you lock up the house before leaving?"

"No, Fred; you ought to have told me that before."

And her husband answered,

"Well, you must go home at once and lock up the house before we go any
farther, and you might as well bring something more to eat with you, and
I will wait for you here."

So Kate went, and she thought to herself,

"As Fred wants something more to eat, and he does not care much about
butter and cheese, I will bring some dried apples and a jug of vinegar
back with me."

Then she bolted the front door, but the back door she took off its
hinges, and lifted it on her shoulders, thinking that if she had the
door all safe no harm could come to the house. And she took her time on
the way back, and thought to herself, "Fred will have so much the longer
to rest." So when she got back to him, she called out,

"Fred, if the house-door is safe, no harm can come to the house!"

"Oh dear!" cried he, "what a prudent wife have I! to carry away the
back-door, so that any one may get in, and to bolt the front door! It is
too late now to go home, but as you have brought the door so far, you
may carry it on farther."

"All right, I will carry the door, Fred," said she, "but the dried
apples and the vinegar will be too heavy for me; I will hang them on the
door and make it carry them."

Now they went into the wood to look for the thieves, but they could not
find them. When it grew dark they got up into a tree to pass the night
there. No sooner had they settled down when up came the pedlars, some of
those fellows who carry away what should not go with them, and who find
things before they are lost. They laid themselves down directly under
the tree where Fred and Kate were, and they made a fire, and began to
divide their spoil. Then Fred got down on the farther side of the tree
and gathered together some stones, and then got up again, intending to
stone the robbers to death with them. The stones, however, did not hit
them, and they said,

"It will soon be morning; the wind is rising and shaking down the
fir-cones."

Now all the time Kate had the door on her shoulder, and as it weighed
upon her heavily, she thought it must be the dried apples, and she said,

"Fred, I must throw down the dried apples."

"No, Kate, not now," answered he; "we might be discovered."

"Oh dear, Fred, but I must! they weigh me down so!" said she.

"Well then, do it, if you must, in the name of all that's tormenting!"
cried he; and down rolled the apples between the boughs, and the robbers
cried,

"There are birds in this tree!"

After a while, as the door still weighed her down heavily, Kate said, "O
Fred, I must pour away the vinegar;" and he answered,

"No, Kate, you must not do that; we might be discovered."

"Oh dear me, Fred, but I must! it weighs me down so!"

"Then do it, if you must, in the name of all that's tormenting!"

And she poured out the vinegar, so that the men were all besprinkled.

And they said one to another,

"The morning dew is beginning to fall already."

At last Kate began to think that it must really be the door that weighed
so heavy, and she said,

"Fred, I must throw down the door!" and he answered,

"No, Kate, not now; we might be discovered."

"Oh dear me, Fred, but I must! it weighs me down so."

"No, Kate, you must hold it fast."

"O Fred, it's slipping, it's falling!"

"Well then, let it fall in the name of torment!" cried Fred in a
passion. And so it fell with a great crash, and the thieves below cried,

"There is something wrong about this tree!" and they got up in a great
hurry and ran off, leaving their spoil behind them. And early in the
morning when Fred and Kate came down from the tree they got all their
gold again and carried it home.

And when they reached their house again Fred said,

"Now, Kate, you must fall to and be very industrious and work hard."

"All right, Fred, I will go into the field and cut corn," said she.

And when she came into the field she said to herself,

"Shall I eat before I cut, or shall I sleep before I cut? well, I will
eat first." And so she ate, and after that she felt sleepy, but she
began to cut and went on half asleep cutting her own clothes, skirts,
gown, and all, and when she at last woke up and found herself in rags,
she said to herself,

"Is this really I or not? oh dear, it is not I!"

After a while night came on, and Kate ran into the village and knocked
at her husband's door calling out, "Fred!"

"What is it?" said he.

"I want to know if Kate is at home," said she.

"Oh yes," he answered, "she is lying here fast asleep."

So she said to herself, "All right then, I am certainly at home," and
she ran on farther.

Soon she came upon some thieves who were looking about for something to
steal, and she went up to them and offered to help them, and the thieves
thought she knew of a good place and opportunity, and were glad of her
offer. But Kate walked in front of the houses calling out,

"Good people, what have you for us to steal?"

So the thieves thought to themselves, "This will never do," and wished
themselves quit of her. At last they said to her,

"Just at the end of the village there are some turnips in the parson's
field; go and fetch us some."

So Kate went into the field and began to pull some up, but very lazily,
and never raised herself. Presently came by a man who saw her, and
thought she was some evil thing grubbing for the turnips. So he ran
quickly into the village and said to the parson,

"O parson, some evil creature is grubbing in your turnip-field!"

"Oh dear!" answered the parson, "I have a lame foot, I cannot go to
drive it away."

And the man at once offered to take him on his back, and he did so.

Just as they reached the field Kate got up and stood upright.

"Oh, the devil!" cried the parson, and both took to their heels, and the
parson was able, out of his great fear, to run faster with his lame foot
than the man who had carried him on his back with both legs sound.




THE LITTLE FARMER


THERE was a certain village where lived many rich farmers and only one
poor one, whom they called the Little Farmer. He had not even a cow, and
still less had he money to buy one; and he and his wife greatly wished
for such a thing. One day he said to her,

"Listen, I have a good idea; it is that your godfather the joiner shall
make us a calf of wood and paint it brown, so as to look just like any
other; and then in time perhaps it will grow big and become a cow."

This notion pleased the wife, and godfather joiner set to work to saw
and plane, and soon turned out a calf complete, with its head down and
neck stretched out as if it were grazing.

The next morning, as the cows were driven to pasture, the Little Farmer
called out to the drover,

"Look here, I have got a little calf to go, but it is still young and
must be carried."

"All right!" said the drover, and tucked it under his arm, carried it
into the meadows, and stood it in the grass. So the calf stayed where it
was put, and seemed to be eating all the time, and the drover thought to
himself,

"It will soon be able to run alone, if it grazes at that rate!"

In the evening, when the herds had to be driven home, he said to the
calf, "If you can stand there eating like that, you can just walk off on
your own four legs; I am not going to lug you under my arm again!"

But the Little Farmer was standing by his house-door, and waiting for
his calf; and when he saw the cow-herd coming through the village
without it, he asked what it meant. The cow-herd answered, "It is still
out there eating away, and never attended to the call, and would not
come with the rest."

Then the Little Farmer said,

"I will tell you what, I must have my beast brought home."

And they went together through the fields in quest of it, but some one
had stolen it, and it was gone. And the drover said,

"Most likely it has run away."

But the Little Farmer said "Not it!" and brought the cow-herd before the
bailiff, who ordered him for his carelessness to give the Little Farmer
a cow for the missing calf.

So now the Little Farmer and his wife possessed their long-wished-for
cow; they rejoiced with all their hearts, but unfortunately they had no
fodder for it, and could give it nothing to eat, so that before long
they had to kill it. Its flesh they salted down, and the Little Farmer
went to the town to sell the skin and buy a new calf with what he got
for it. On the way he came to a mill, where a raven was sitting with
broken wings, and he took it up out of pity and wrapped it in the skin.
The weather was very stormy, and it blew and rained, so he turned into
the mill and asked for shelter. The miller's wife was alone in the
house, and she said to the Little Farmer,

"Well, come in and lay thee down in the straw," and she gave him a piece
of bread and cheese. So the Little Farmer ate, and then lay down with
his skin near him, and the miller's wife thought he was sleeping with
fatigue. After a while in came another man, and the miller's wife
received him very well, saying,

"My husband is out; we will make good cheer."

The Little Farmer listened to what they said, and when he heard good
cheer spoken of, he grew angry to think he had been put off with bread
and cheese. For the miller's wife presently brought out roast meat,
salad, cakes, and wine.

Now as the pair were sitting down to their feast, there came a knock at
the door.

"Oh dear," cried the woman, "it is my husband!" In a twinkling she
popped the roast meat into the oven, the wine under the pillow, the
salad in the bed, the cakes under the bed, and the man in the
linen-closet. Then she opened the door to her husband, saying,

"Thank goodness, you are here! what weather it is, as if the world were
coming to an end!"

When the miller saw the Little Farmer lying in the straw, he said,

"What fellow have you got there?"

"Oh!" said the wife, "the poor chap came in the midst of the wind and
rain and asked for shelter, and I gave him some bread and cheese and
spread some straw for him."

The husband answered, "Oh well, I have no objection, only get me
something to eat at once."

But the wife said, "There is nothing but bread and cheese."

"Anything will do for me," answered the miller, "bread and cheese for
ever!" and catching sight of the Little Farmer, he cried,

"Come along, and keep me company!" The Little Farmer did not wait to be
asked twice, but sat down and ate. After a while the miller noticed the
skin lying on the ground with the raven wrapped up in it, and he said,
"What have you got there?"

The Little Farmer answered, "A fortune-teller."

And the miller asked "Can he tell my fortune?"

"Why not?" answered the Little Farmer. "He will tell four things, and
the fifth he keeps to himself." Now the miller became very curious, and
said, "Ask him to say something."

And the Little Farmer pinched the raven, so that it croaked, "Crr, crr."
"What does he say?" asked the miller. And the Little Farmer answered,

"First he says that there is wine under the pillow."

"That would be jolly!" cried the miller, and he went to look, and found
the wine, and then asked, "What next?"

So the Little Farmer made the raven croak again, and then said,

"He says, secondly, that there is roast meat in the oven."

"That would be jolly!" cried the miller, and he went and looked, and
found the roast meat. The Little Farmer made the fortune-teller speak
again, and then said,

"He says, thirdly, that there is salad in the bed."

"That would be jolly!" cried the miller, and went and looked, and found
the salad. Once more the Little Farmer pinched the raven, so that he
croaked, and said,

"He says, fourthly and lastly, that there are cakes under the bed."

"That would be jolly!" cried the miller, and he went and looked, and
found the cakes.

And now the two sat down to table, and the miller's wife felt very
uncomfortable, and she went to bed and took all the keys with her. The
miller was eager to know what the fifth thing could be, but the Little
Farmer said,

"Suppose we eat the four things in peace first, for the fifth thing is a
great deal worse."

So they sat and ate, and while they ate, they bargained together as to
how much the miller would give for knowing the fifth thing; and at last
they agreed upon three hundred dollars. Then the Little Farmer pinched
the raven, so that he croaked aloud. And the miller asked what he said,
and the Little Farmer answered,

"He says that there is a demon in the linen-closet."

"Then," said the miller, "that demon must out of the linen-closet," and
he unbarred the house-door, while the Little Farmer got the key of the
linen-closet from the miller's wife, and opened it. Then the man rushed
forth, and out of the house, and the miller said,

"I saw the black rogue with my own eyes; so that is a good riddance."

And the Little Farmer took himself off by daybreak next morning with the
three hundred dollars.

And after this the Little Farmer by degrees got on in the world, and
built himself a good house, and the other farmers said,

"Surely the Little Farmer has been where it rains gold pieces, and has
brought home money by the bushel."

And he was summoned before the bailiff to say whence his riches came.
And all he said was,

"I sold my calf's skin for three hundred dollars."

When the other farmers heard this they wished to share such good luck,
and ran home, killed all their cows, skinned them in order to sell them
also for the same high price as the Little Farmer. And the bailiff
said, "I must be beforehand with them." So he sent his servant into the
town to the skin-buyer, and he only gave her three dollars for the skin,
and that was faring better than the others, for when they came, they did
not get as much as that, for the skin-buyer said,

"What am I to do with all these skins?"

Now the other farmers were very angry with the Little Farmer for
misleading them, and they vowed vengeance against him, and went to
complain of his deceit to the bailiff. The poor Little Farmer was with
one voice sentenced to death, and to be put into a cask with holes in
it, and rolled into the water. So he was led to execution, and a priest
was fetched to say a mass for him, and the rest of the people had to
stand at a distance. As soon as the Little Farmer caught sight of the
priest he knew him for the man who was hid in the linen-closet at the
miller's. And he said to him,

"As I let you out of the cupboard, you must let me out of the cask."

At that moment a shepherd passed with a flock of sheep, and the Little
Farmer knowing him to have a great wish to become bailiff himself,
called out with all his might,

"No, I will not, and if all the world asked me, I would not!"

The shepherd, hearing him, came up and asked what it was he would not
do. The Little Farmer answered,

"They want to make me bailiff, if I sit in this cask, but I will not do
it!"

The shepherd said,

"If that is all there is to do in order to become bailiff I will sit in
the cask and welcome." And the Little Farmer answered,

"Yes, that is all, just you get into the cask, and you will become
bailiff." So the shepherd agreed, and got in, and the Little Farmer
fastened on the top; then he collected the herd of sheep and drove them
away. The priest went back to the parish-assembly, and told them the
mass had been said. Then they came and began to roll the cask into the
water, and as it went the shepherd inside called out, "I consent to be
bailiff!"

They thought that it was the Little Farmer who spoke, and they
answered,

"All right; but first you must go down below and look about you a
little," and they rolled the cask into the water.

Upon that the farmers went home, and when they reached the village,
there they met the Little Farmer driving a flock of sheep, and looking
quite calm and contented. The farmers were astonished and cried,

"Little Farmer, whence come you? how did you get out of the water?"

"Oh, easily," answered he, "I sank and sank until I came to the bottom;
then I broke through the cask and came out of it, and there were
beautiful meadows and plenty of sheep feeding, so I brought away this
flock with me."

Then said the farmers, "Are there any left?"

"Oh yes," answered the Little Farmer, "more than you can possibly need."

Then the farmers agreed that they would go and fetch some sheep also,
each man a flock for himself; and the bailiff said, "Me first." And they
all went together, and in the blue sky there were little fleecy clouds
like lambkins, and they were reflected in the water; and the farmers
cried out,

"There are the sheep down there at the bottom."

When the bailiff heard that he pressed forward and said,

"I will go first and look about me, and if things look well, I will call
to you."

And he jumped plump into the water, and they all thought that the noise
he made meant "Come," so the whole company jumped in one after the
other. So perished all the proprietors of the village, and the Little
Farmer, as sole heir, became a rich man.




THE QUEEN BEE


TWO king's sons once started to seek adventures, and fell into a wild,
reckless way of living, and gave up all thoughts of going home again.
Their third and youngest brother, who was called Witling, and had
remained behind, started off to seek them; and when at last he found
them, they jeered at his simplicity in thinking that he could make his
way in the world, while they who were so much cleverer were
unsuccessful. But they all three went on together until they came to an
ant-hill, which the two eldest brothers wished to stir up, that they
might see the little ants hurry about in their fright and carrying off
their eggs, but Witling said,

"Leave the little creatures alone, I will not suffer them to be
disturbed."

And they went on farther until they came to a lake, where a number of
ducks were swimming about. The two eldest brothers wanted to catch a
couple and cook them, but Witling would not allow it, and said, "Leave
the creatures alone, I will not suffer them to be killed."

And then they came to a bee's-nest in a tree, and there was so much
honey in it that it overflowed and ran down the trunk. The two eldest
brothers then wanted to make a fire beneath the tree, that the bees
might be stifled by the smoke, and then they could get at the honey. But
Witling prevented them, saying,

"Leave the little creatures alone, I will not suffer them to be
stifled."

At last the three brothers came to a castle where there were in the
stables many horses standing, all of stone, and the brothers went
through all the rooms until they came to a door at the end secured with
three locks, and in the middle of the door a small opening through which
they could look into the room. And they saw a little grey-haired man
sitting at a table. They called out to him once, twice, and he did not
hear, but at the third time he got up, undid the locks, and came out.
Without speaking a word he led them to a table loaded with all sorts of
good things, and when they had eaten and drunk he showed to each his
bed-chamber. The next morning the little grey man came to the eldest
brother, and beckoning him, brought him to a table of stone, on which
were written three things directing by what means the castle could be
delivered from its enchantment. The first thing was, that in the wood
under the moss lay the pearls belonging to the princess--a thousand in
number--and they were to be sought for and collected, and if he who
should undertake the task had not finished it by sunset,--if but one
pearl were missing,--he must be turned to stone. So the eldest brother
went out, and searched all day, but at the end of it he had only found
one hundred; just as was said on the table of stone came to pass and he
was turned into stone. The second brother undertook the adventure next
day, but it fared with him no better than with the first; he found two
hundred pearls, and was turned into stone.

And so at last it was Witling's turn, and he began to search in the
moss; but it was a very tedious business to find the pearls, and he grew
so out of heart that he sat down on a stone and began to weep. As he was
sitting thus, up came the ant-king with five thousand ants, whose lives
had been saved through Witling's pity, and it was not very long before
the little insects had collected all the pearls and put them in a heap.

Now the second thing ordered by the table of stone was to get the key of
the princess's sleeping-chamber out of the lake.

And when Witling came to the lake, the ducks whose lives he had saved
came swimming, and dived below, and brought up the key from the bottom.
The third thing that had to be done was the most difficult, and that was
to choose out the youngest and loveliest of the three princesses, as
they lay sleeping. All bore a perfect resemblance each to the other, and
only differed in this, that before they went to sleep each one had eaten
a different sweetmeat,--the eldest a piece of sugar, the second a little
syrup, and the third a spoonful of honey. Now the Queen-bee of those
bees that Witling had protected from the fire came at this moment, and
trying the lips of all three, settled on those of the one that had eaten
honey, and so it was that the king's son knew which to choose. Then the
spell was broken; every one awoke from stony sleep, and took their right
form again.

And Witling married the youngest and loveliest princess, and became king
after her father's death. But his two brothers had to put up with the
two other sisters.




THE GOLDEN GOOSE


THERE was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was called the
Simpleton, and was despised, laughed at, and neglected, on every
occasion. It happened one day that the eldest son wished to go into the
forest to cut wood, and before he went his mother gave him a delicious
pancake and a flask of wine, that he might not suffer from hunger or
thirst. When he came into the forest a little old grey man met him, who
wished him good day, and said,

"Give me a bit of cake out of your pocket, and let me have a drink of
your wine; I am so hungry and thirsty."

But the prudent youth answered,

"Give you my cake and my wine? I haven't got any; be off with you."

And leaving the little man standing there, he went off. Then he began to
fell a tree, but he had not been at it long before he made a wrong
stroke, and the hatchet hit him in the arm, so that he was obliged to go
home and get it bound up. That was what came of the little grey man.

Afterwards the second son went into the wood, and the mother gave to
him, as to the eldest, a pancake and a flask of wine. The little old
grey man met him also, and begged for a little bit of cake and a drink
of wine. But the second son spoke out plainly, saying,

"What I give you I lose myself, so be off with you."

And leaving the little man standing there, he went off. The punishment
followed; as he was chopping away at the tree, he hit himself in the leg
so severely that he had to be carried home.

Then said the Simpleton,

"Father, let me go for once into the forest to cut wood;" and the father
answered, "Your brothers have hurt themselves by so doing; give it up,
you understand nothing about it."

But the Simpleton went on begging so long, that the father said at last,

"Well, be off with you; you will only learn by experience."

The mother gave him a cake (it was only made with water, and baked in
the ashes), and with it a flask of sour beer. When he came into the
forest the little old grey man met him, and greeted him, saying,

"Give me a bit of your cake, and a drink from your flask; I am so hungry
and thirsty."

And the Simpleton answered, "I have only a flour and water cake and sour
beer; but if that is good enough for you, let us sit down together and
eat." Then they sat down, and as the Simpleton took out his flour and
water cake it became a rich pancake, and his sour beer became good wine;
then they ate and drank, and afterwards the little man said,

"As you have such a kind heart, and share what you have so willingly, I
will bestow good luck upon you. Yonder stands an old tree; cut it down,
and at its roots you will find some thing," and thereupon the little man
took his departure.

The Simpleton went there, and hewed away at the tree, and when it fell
he saw, sitting among the roots, a goose with feathers of pure gold. He
lifted it out and took it with him to an inn where he intended to stay
the night. The landlord had three daughters who, when they saw the
goose, were curious to know what wonderful kind of bird it was, and
ended by longing for one of its golden feathers. The eldest thought, "I
will wait for a good opportunity, and then I will pull out one of its
feathers for myself;" and so, when the Simpleton was gone out, she
seized the goose by its wing--but there her finger and hand had to stay,
held fast. Soon after came the second sister with the same idea of
plucking out one of the golden feathers for herself; but scarcely had
she touched her sister, than she also was obliged to stay, held fast.
Lastly came the third with the same intentions; but the others screamed
out,

"Stay away! for heaven's sake stay away!"

But she did not see why she should stay away, and thought, "If they do
so, why should not I?" and went towards them. But when she reached her
sisters there she stopped, hanging on with them. And so they had to
stay, all night. The next morning the Simpleton took the goose under his
arm and went away, unmindful of the three girls that hung on to it. The
three had always to run after him, left and right, wherever his legs
carried him. In the midst of the fields they met the parson, who, when
he saw the procession, said,

"Shame on you, girls, running after a young fellow through the fields
like this," and forthwith he seized hold of the youngest by the hand to
drag her away, but hardly had he touched her when he too was obliged to
run after them himself. Not long after the sexton came that way, and
seeing the respected parson following at the heels of the three girls,
he called out,

"Ho, your reverence, whither away so quickly? You forget that we have
another christening to-day;" and he seized hold of him by his gown; but
no sooner had he touched him than he was obliged to follow on too. As
the five tramped on, one after another, two peasants with their hoes
came up from the fields, and the parson cried out to them, and begged
them to come and set him and the sexton free, but no sooner had they
touched the sexton than they had to follow on too; and now there were
seven following the Simpleton and the goose.

By and by they came to a town where a king reigned, who had an only
daughter who was so serious that no one could make her laugh; therefore
the king had given out that whoever should make her laugh should have
her in marriage. The Simpleton, when he heard this, went with his goose
and his hangers-on into the presence of the king's daughter, and as soon
as she saw the seven people following always one after the other, she
burst out laughing, and seemed as if she could never stop. And so the
Simpleton earned a right to her as his bride; but the king did not like
him for a son-in-law and made all kinds of objections, and said he must
first bring a man who could drink up a whole cellar of wine. The
Simpleton thought that the little grey man would be able to help him,
and went out into the forest, and there, on the very spot where he
felled the tree, he saw a man sitting with a very sad countenance. The
Simpleton asked him what was the matter, and he answered,

"I have a great thirst, which I cannot quench: cold water does not agree
with me; I have indeed drunk up a whole cask of wine, but what good is a
drop like that?"

Then said the Simpleton,

"I can help you; only come with me, and you shall have enough."

He took him straight to the king's cellar, and the man sat himself down
before the big vats, and drank, and drank, and before a day was over he
had drunk up the whole cellar-full. The Simpleton again asked for his
bride, but the king was annoyed that a wretched fellow, called the
Simpleton by everybody, should carry off his daughter, and so he made
new conditions. He was to produce a man who could eat up a mountain of
bread. The Simpleton did not hesitate long, but ran quickly off to the
forest, and there in the same place sat a man who had fastened a strap
round his body, making a very piteous face, and saying,

"I have eaten a whole bakehouse full of rolls, but what is the use of
that when one is so hungry as I am? My stomach feels quite empty, and I
am obliged to strap myself together, that I may not die of hunger."

The Simpleton was quite glad of this, and said,

"Get up quickly, and come along with me, and you shall have enough to
eat."

He led him straight to the king's courtyard, where all the meal in the
kingdom had been collected and baked into a mountain of bread. The man
out of the forest settled himself down before it and hastened to eat,
and in one day the whole mountain had disappeared.

Then the Simpleton asked for his bride the third time. The king,
however, found one more excuse, and said he must have a ship that should
be able to sail on land or on water.

"So soon," said he, "as you come sailing along with it, you shall have
my daughter for your wife."

The Simpleton went straight to the forest, and there sat the little old
grey man with whom he had shared his cake, and he said,

"I have eaten for you, and I have drunk for you, I will also give you
the ship; and all because you were kind to me at the first."

Then he gave him the ship that could sail on land and on water, and when
the king saw it he knew he could no longer withhold his daughter. The
marriage took place immediately, and at the death of the king the
Simpleton possessed the kingdom, and lived long and happily with his
wife.

____________________

Transcriber's Notes:

There are 225 illustrations and illustrated drop-caps in the original
book. In this text version, I have only indicated those illustrations
having captions. The html version contains many beautiful and intricate
drawings and woodcuts.

There are several inconsistencies in hyphenation. The following words
appear in the text both with and without a hyphen: bed-chamber,
bed-time, egg-shell, god-father, house-door, in-doors, mill-stone,
sea-side, step-mother, up-stairs.

I have changed or added wrong or missing punctuation in the following
phrases:

    --"Little sister, let me out, I must go[added .]"

    --stood a maiden more beautiful than any he had seen before[added .]

    --put a cap on her, and laid her in the bed in the Queen's place.
      [changed . to ,]

    --So Kate went, and she thought to herself.[changed . to ,]

    --as it weighed upon her heavily, she thought it must be the the
      [deleted repeated word] dried apples, and she said,

    --neck is in danger'[changed ' to ? and added "] answered the cat.

    --"Father, let me go for once into the forest to cut wood;[added "]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Household Stories by the Brothers Grimm, by 
Jacob Grimm and Wilhelm Grimm

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOUSEHOLD STORIES ***

***** This file should be named 19068.txt or 19068.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/0/6/19068/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.